swiss-french designer and architect le corbusier once stated that `a house is a 
machine for living in' (2007: 151). over one hundred and seventy-five years earlier, 
julien offray de la mettrie similarly posited that `man is a machine' (2012: 3). as this 
article will examine the body in isolation as well as within a series of homes or homelike settings, i would like to open by considering these two analogies of the machine. 
for la mettrie, man is a machine in that the complexity of man's nature and the 
non-dualistic conception of body-mind means that `it's initially impossible to get a 
clear idea of it or (therefore) to define it . . . our only way to discover the true nature 
of man is a posteriori, i.e. on the basis of empirical evidence, trying to isolate the soul, 
as it were disentangling it from the body's organs' (la mettrie, 2012: 3). thus, for la 
mettrie the only clear way to understand the physical shell of the body is by likening 
it to a machine. on the other hand, le corbusier takes the view that the house is a 
machine in the same way that an `armchair is a machine for sitting in' and an `ewer is 
a machine for washing oneself' (2007: 151). this double-sided presentation of both 
homes and humans as machines leads to a curious world of automata. for, if we 
consider homes and those of us that inhabit them as machines, we must then look 
at how the machine-of-man functions within the machine-of-the-home and it is this 
idea that will guide my reading of neil gaiman's american gods (2001) in this piece. 
this article puts forth a reading of gaiman's novel that explores the key relationship 
of the body-mind to the home or homes that some of the characters inhabit. 

la mettrie suggests that in order to understand the body and soul connection we 
must have a posteriori knowledge of the subject. the characters that gaiman creates 
function as lenses, in this case, machines to focus on the relationship of the body to 
issues of divinity and experience. these machines need the protection and stability 
provided by the various homes within the text. alongside a focus on the mechanist 
nature of the human body and homes, the question of how myth and legend from 
the old world are transported (or not) to the new world is also a central theme. for 
instance, the book's epigraph, itself a quote from folklorist richard dorson, suggests 
that the demons from the old world could not cross the ocean in order to take up new 
residence in america. for gaiman, those old gods (and demons) did indeed arrive in 

 3 
the minds, hearts, and practices of immigrants. more importantly, they took up residence and created homes in their new country. this can be seen in the opening to 
the novel, which presents a description of shadow's first home, a prison cell, that he 
shares with low key (loki) lyesmith. the cell is not given much description, only 
that it was decorated with `a songbirds of north america calendar, which was the only 
calendar they sold in the prison commissary' and a few books: one on coin tricks the 
second a copy of herodotus's histories a gift from low key to shadow (gaiman, 2012: 
3, 4). while this home is temporary for both of the characters the message is clear 
that these immigrant gods can and do exist in every strata of american life. some of 
the characterisations of these gods are decidedly nationalistically stereotypical. the 
seven-foot-tall leprechaun mad sweeney, for example, is first seen in jack's crocodile 
bar and gods from eastern europe occupy spaces that are little more than tenements, 
constructed to evoke the past association of inner-city ghettos commonly home to 
immigrant populations within large cities (gaiman, 2012: 33, 72). thus gaiman utilises familiar stereotypes to align the immigrant gods from the old world with the 
communities that would have considered them important or venerable. 

at its core, however, what these initial moments of the text demonstrate is that 
neil gaiman's novel,  american gods, is a story about homes lost, found and imagined. as homes and homelands are left behind, the characters in the novel must 
fashion new homes within a new country and thus through acts of creative self-fashioning recast themselves in the territory of america. many of the gods upon 
which the text focuses are immigrant gods, brought to america by the strong beliefs 
of earlier generations. there are also the new gods, those that have risen up and are 
fighting for what they feel is their rightful place atop a new pantheon. in order to 
explore this relationship between homes, gods and performative belief, this article focuses on the concept of the characters' bodies as represented in the homes 
that they occupy. to do this my argument is predicated on a somaesthetic reading of the body as the locus from which the characters begin to construct ideas of 
home. somaesthetics as conceived by richard shusterman has three facets: analytic 
somaesthetics, which `describes the basic nature of bodily perceptions and practices 

4
and their function in our knowledge and construction of reality'; pragmatic somaesthetics, which proposes `specific methods of somatic improvement and engaging in 
their comparative critique'; and practical somaesthetics, which entails `intelligently 
disciplined body work aimed at somatic self-improvement' (shusterman, 2000: 271, 
272, 276). this paper will look primarily to the analytic elements of somaesthetics 
as they have the greatest import with respect to gaiman's novel. this is not to say 
that pragmatic and practical somaesthetics are of no use to literary studies more 
broadly. it is rather that their practical usefulness to a primary text like  american 
gods is limited. within its analytic framework this paper will explore how the char acters in the novel construct and come to know their reality. somaesthetics provides 
a theoretical framework and vocabulary to discuss the role of the body in a literary 
context. there are of course numerous other theories and theoretical/philosophical writings about the role of the body in the cognitive process, however, many of 
the key authors such as antonio damasio in descartes' error (1994) and the feeling 
of what happens  (1999) as well as george lakoff and mark johnson and their text 
philosophy in the flesh  (1999), do not provide adequate scope with regard to dis cussing the body-mind continuum. this is not to say that these theories hold no 
value in relation to the aims of somaesthetics (shusterman himself acknowledges 
the "encouraging . . . recent research related to embodied cognition as exemplified in 
the work of . . . george lakoff, mark johnson, antonio damasio" among others) but 
simply that aims and objectives of somaesthetics are indeed more suited to this type 
of literary analysis (2008: 23). additionally, as somaesthetics as a field has grown it 
has been used to explore such diverse artistic and somatic practices as photography, 
dance, performance art and architecture, and is the most relevant theory of the 
body-mind relationship for a project of this nature. 

this article interrogates the diverse ideas of home in the text, from the back seat of a limo to a small midwestern town, and explores how the idea of home is 
portrayed via gaiman's use and description of his characters' bodies. the characters 
within the universe of the novel (broadly divided between old gods and new gods) 
provide an interesting focus for investigating the use of native and non-native bodies 

 5 
with respect to the construction of homes or home-like spaces. as a british immi grant to america, gaiman constructs a new definition of what home means for his 
characters and how, via these characters' bodies, the home is a site of comfort and 
resistance to the events of the novel. in addition, several of the gods in this story 
occupy spaces that are constructed to make the reader aware of the nature of the 
character while preserving some qualities of their fictionalised homelands, places of 
power and, in the case of the old gods, their new adopted home.

this piece is not the first to suggest that gaiman's work is connected to notions 
of nation, identity and home. siobhan carroll, for instance, uses gaiman's novel 
to interrogate the idea of national identity, or more specifically the fiction of an 
american identity, and in so doing places american gods within the category of urban 
fantasy and suggests that the novel's failure to `locate a stable, "real america"' is one 
of the ways in which gaiman can be seen to be `dramatizing the importance of fiction 
to social constructions of place and nation' (carroll, 2012: 308). thus, for carroll, 
the fact that there is no one place that can be pinned down and claimed as the real 
america in the novel makes the larger and more important point that cultures often 
rely on stories and myths to create their sense of identity. instead i suggest that the 
`real america' that carroll finds fleeting and unstable is, in actuality, a product of the 
characters' bodies and the spaces that they consider home.

when considering space more broadly in order to include the home we should 
turn to the work of gaston bachelard, specifically to his work  the poetics of space 
(1958, translated to english 1969) where he notes that `the house shelters daydreaming, the house protects the dreamer, the house allows one to dream in peace' (1969: 
6). thus, as they struggle for recognition, both old gods and new gods (as representations of belief systems) are connected and drawn to places of power where 
people can imagine them and are free to imagine and invoke their influence and 
providence. in this way the central importance of the home, as the cornerstone of 
america, is reinforced via the protective power and the ability to invite fantasy and 
imagination. in addition, one need only consider that for americans churches, synagogues, mosques and temples are not simply buildings, they are `houses of worship.'  

6
thus, the very act of prayer that gives the titular gods of gaiman's novel strength 
is most often associated with bachelard's primary function of the home. while 
bachelard provides a bourgeois reading of space, cultural geographer doreen massey 
provides a more nuanced interpretation. for massey, places `in fact, are always constructed out of articulations of social relations (trading connections, the unequal 
links of colonialism, thoughts of home) which are not only internal to that locale but 
which link them to elsewhere' (1995: 183). this linking of internal and external relations, combined with the notion that `there is or has been some kind of disruption 
between the past of these places and at least some elements of their present or their 
potential future,' would seem to suggest that the gods and their places of power, 
both in america and the old world, are representative of change within immigrant 
communities and the tension between loyalties to the old country and the need to 
adapt and assimilate (massey, 1995:183). it is through the cultural memory of the 
characters in this text that these tensions can be examined. the character czernobog 
(gaiman's version of a slavic deity whose name translates to black god) states that `all 
our countrymen go to new york. then, we come out here, to chicago. everything got 
very bad. in the old country, they had nearly forgotten me. here, i am a bad memory 
no one wants to remember' (gaiman, 2012: 76). this suggests that there has been 
some form of disruption as czernobog and his family continually move in an effort 
to reclaim their power yet ultimately settle in a place where the populace has some 
cultural memory, even if the community does not want to remember, which pushes 
those memories deeper into the cultural unconscious. 

the repressed memories of these immigrant communities frequently manifests 
in the way that the gods often speak to shadow, via dreams or dream like experiences. there is an often-unreal quality to the interactions shadow has with many 
of the gods (old and new) in the text. dreams play an active and important role 
in the narrative of  american gods  (and, of course, of the mythologising of the 
american dream), notably in the recurring dreams that the protagonist (shadow 
moon) has throughout the novel. in this way, gaiman's text can be read as both an 
embrace and a challenge to the home as the fundamental building block of america.  
the protective and evocative qualities of the home, for bachelard and also for gaiman, 

 7 
allow for a place that is not fixed geographically but rather is created by the interaction of a person or character within the space. as the characters move about the landscape of america they create new homes and those homes allow for the dreams (and 
nightmares) that portend the coming conflict. the bodies that gaiman constructs in 
his text are constantly moving and rarely seem to be comfortable in any of the spaces 
that they inhabit. thus, in order to analyse the relationship of the body, the home 
and america it is necessary to look at current thinking on the role of the body as it 
pertains to perception, concentration/mental functioning and imagination. 

somaesthetics, the body and drugs
shusterman has stated that `somaesthetics, roughly defined, concerns the body as 
a locus of sensory-aesthetic appreciation (aesthesis) and creative self-fashioning' 
(shusterman, 2012: 26). it is my contention that as the characters in gaiman's novel 
fashion their identities and interact with the landscapes and buildings where the 
action takes place, gaiman can be seen to choose words and phrases that evoke specific somatic reactions in the characters and perhaps even in his readers. by drawing 
attention to his characters' bodies as they come in to contact with and react to (and 
are constructed by) the various spaces that serve as homes in the novel, gaiman 
embeds these connections at the centre of his text. these concerns are deployed in 
an analysis of the body's (or soma's) relationship to architectural space. as the home 
is one of the key locations where identity is formed it seems crucial to interrogate the 
special relationship that the soma has to this most important space. 

the relationship of the body, or soma as shusterman prefers, to the home is 
inherent throughout the history of architecture, so much so in fact that we can 
see that 

the body - as a composite structure through which we live - is itself   
symbolically understood through tectonic notions. this symbolic connection extends from ancient greek philosophers like plato, roman architects 
like vitruvius, and early christian thinkers like st. paul through renaissance 
writers like henry wotton, and all the way into modern scientific critics of 
religion such as freud (shusterman, 2012: 223).

8
this long and varied history of the relationship of the body to the buildings we construct to house and protect them is not confined only to the physical structures but 
also often cross-pollinates into the imaginary world of the arts and literature. when 
considering what impact any of this may have had on gaiman as an author, i will 
first consider the role of the "technical boy" in  american gods and that character's 
relationship to the author william s. burroughs, a writer who was equally concerned 
with the body and home (lydenberg, 1987; nelson, 1991). the technical boy, who in 
the fictionalised america created in the text is both the god of and a personification 
of the internet, has a deeper and more complex role in the story and the connection 
to burroughs is revealed in two distinct ways. the first is the essence of the electronic 
nature of the worship that the technical boy collects. burroughs noted that `anything 
that can be done chemically can be done in other ways,' suggesting that all drug-induced states and, by extension, spiritual states can be manufactured via the proper 
stimulation of the electromagnetic signals in the brain (burroughs & odier, 1989: 
131). if transcendent religious experiences are the product of brain chemistry and 
electromagnetic signals we can consider the role of brain chemistry in the creation of 
these experiences. the chemical n-dimethyltryptamine (dmt) and its role as (potentially) the spirit molecule (responsible for near-death, and religious-like, experiences) 
is of particular interest because of the presence of sigma-1 receptors in mammalian 
nervous systems. indeed, recent research notes that `biochemical, physiological, and 
behavioral experiments indicate that dmt is an endogenous agonist for the sigma-1 
receptor' thus suggesting that human beings are capable of a hallucinogenic or 
psychedelic experience in response to the presence of dmt in the nervous system 
simulating transendence (fontanilla et al., 2009). additionally, the technical boy is 
smoking something that shadow notes is `not tobacco . . . not pot either . . . it smelled 
a little like burning electrical parts' (gaiman, 2012: 52). the substance is revealed by 
the technical boy to be, `synthetic toad skins' further adding `you know they can synthesise bufotenin now?' (gaiman, 2012: 53). bufotenin is an entheogenic substance 
closely related to dmt and they are nearly functionally identical. in  american gods 
the technical boy, via his fluency in burroughs' ideas of  electro-neuro-chemistry, can 

 9 
be read as a being who gains power by consuming the worship of those who traverse 
the internet, thus providing a similarly religious-like experience online. this trans mutes his home, physically represented by a rolling limousine and sub contextually 
by the zeros and ones of binary code manifested on screens across the world as bits 
of data, in to houses of worship. these flickering computer monitors could then activate the pineal gland in ways that trigger the release of dmt or its requisite precursors in accord with burroughs' philosophy. burroughs and his colleagues explored 
this idea in depth via experimentation with flicker machines and alpha wave stimulation, which are not unlike the flickering computer monitors through which the 
digital boy collects his strength (geiger, 2003). 

the nod to burroughs is made explicit when the technical boy tells shadow to give 
a message to his employer mr wednesday `tell him that language is a virus and that 
religion is an operating system and prayers are just so much fucking spam' (gaiman, 
2012: 53). the phrase that `language is a virus' comes directly from burroughs' own 
personal philosophy on language and thought control. on this topic he states, `my 
basic theory is that the written word is a virus that made the spoken word possible' 
and he extends the idea to a scientific conclusion by citing the work of `wilson smith, 
a scientist who really thinks about his subject' (burroughs & odier, 1989: 12). the 
virus, however, is incredibly resourceful in that it is not classified or recognised as 
such. quoting a chapter from smith's book,  mechanism's of virus infections  (1963), 
he notes that `viruses . . . are thus wholly dependent on the integrity of the cellular 
systems they parasitize' as is the technical boy to his followers and users (burroughs & 
odier, 1989: 12). as the new god of the information superhighway, the technical 
boy's home is naturally a stretch limousine that is almost constantly in motion like 
the bits of information that fly over the so-called information superhighway. 

the idea of the technical boy as the internet personified, which naturally needs 
connection and a flow of information in order to function properly, is heightened 
later in the book. a series of events leads to the need to exchange a dead body, 
and upon arrival the technical boy is cut off from the conveniences of the modern 
world. he complains about the location for the meeting saying, `this place is such 

10
a fucking dump. no power. out of wireless range. i mean when you got to be wired, 
you're already back in the stone age,' thus setting up this temporary home as being 
unsuited to his particular somatic constitution (gaiman, 2012: 437). after this 
pronouncement the technical boy joins shadow (the protagonist) in his room and 
appears scared by the lack of technology and the general isolation that the location 
provides. after a moment of conversation the technical boy returns to his room and 
begins to throw himself against the walls. this act of the somatically personified 
internet using its body in an attempt to start moving suggests that the information 
superhighway (or at least the god of it) is only at home while in motion, even if that 
motion is not essentially productive. 

returning to the connection of somaesthetics to architecture and space 
shusterman states that 

if architecture involves mass as well as space, then the soma likewise pro vides our most immediate sense of mass and volume. we feel the solid mass 
and thickness of our body; we also feel the liquids and gases that move 
through its volume (shusterman, 2012: 224). 

this idea complicates how a character such as the technical boy can ever "feel at 
home" since the very material that he would be made of is mostly insubstantial. 
that is not to say that the material of information on the internet has no mass; in 
2007 both discover magazine and scholar russell seitz produced estimates of the 
mass of the internet of between the smallest grain of sand (cass) and two ounces 
(seitz). however, these masses are so low that a personified internet, the technical 
boy, would have a difficult time staying still, thus he chooses to ram himself into the 
walls of his room. shusterman further explains that

the architecture of the body (the fact that we are essentially top-heavy - 
our heavier head, shoulders, and torso resting on our significantly less 
massive legs) is part of what impels the soma to move because its vertical equilibrium is more easily sustained in motion than in standing still 
(2012: 225). 

 11 
thus, as the internet is personified by the technical boy, it only stands to reason that 
he might become an exaggerated somatic being so that not only is stillness difficult, 
but it is nearly impossible. 

in gaiman's novel, not every character responds negatively to stillness and lack 
of environmental stability. where the technical boy's response can be attributed to 
his separation from his source of power and in essence his home, other characters 
are able to adapt to new spaces more calmly and in so doing create new places of stability and power. the main character, shadow, occupies several different domiciles, a 
prison cell, a series of motor vehicles, a funeral parlour in cairo, illinois, a temporary 
home in the idyllic town of lakeside, wisconsin and finally in the world tree (yggdrasil). in each of these different homes shadow has a unique somatic response that not 
only informs the location but also, in many ways, creates them. we are introduced to 
shadow in prison and he is described as `big enough' and in shape in such a way that 
other inmates did not bother him. the prison of the story seems almost as though 
it is constructed around shadow and therefore his responses are linked to this environment. he is somatically aware of a coming storm (both literal and metaphorical) 
even though he exists in a box with no windows so that `the sun went down and 
he didn't see it and the sun came up and he didn't see it' (gaiman, 2012: 5). in this 
way, gaiman conveys the sense that shadow's body mirrors the dense dark walls that 
make up the prison. the character is also connected to the structure in other ways; his 
last several weeks of incarceration were plagued with `a hollowness in the pit of his 
stomach . . . he found himself watching the body language of the guards, of the other 
inmates, searching for a clue to the bad thing that was going to happen' (gaiman, 
2012: 7). here, when shadow stays silent and waits for the impending storm his body 
reacts (the hollowness), yet he ignores it due to the somatic training he has endured 
as a prisoner. in this way shadow's body is as shusterman describes the soma: a   
`docile, malleable site for inscribing social power.' this, in turn, then `reveals the crucial role that the soma can play in political philosophy and social justice' (2008: 21). 
this concept of a docile malleable soma is naturally related to foucault's ideas of 
a `docile body' that `may be subjected, used, transformed, and improved' which in 
turn foucault developed as an extension of la mettrie's `machine man' that `joins 

12
the analysable body to the manipulable body' (1991: 136). thus, when provoked by 
guards, sensing impending doom, or given devastating news, shadow chooses to stay 
quiet and keep his head down, just like a model, disciplined inmate.

the second primary home that shadow occupies is a small apartment in the 
town of lakeside. importantly, the first sense of the apartment that gaiman conveys 
is that it is dwarfed by shadow's own stature. everything in the space is described in 
terms that are diminutive: a tiny kitchen, a small bedroom, and a tinier bathroom 
and as he falls asleep, shadow hears the hum of the refrigerator and a radio in the 
building. both of these sounds suggest that not only is the apartment smallish but 
that the building itself is small compared to the heightened sensory perception possessed by the protagonist, which is most likely a by-product of his days as an inmate. 
his first real experience with the town comes via his body's response to the cold 
wisconsin winter, the cold made him `cough, a dry thin cough, as the bitterly cold 
air touched his lungs' his `ears and face hurt and then his feet hurt' (gaiman, 2012: 
262). his body is, therefore, trapped between two biological imperatives: the need 
for food (that caused him to leave his apartment) and the need for warmth. his journey continues as he catalogues various body parts and their reaction to the conditions `froze his bones and the marrow in his bones, froze the lashes of his eyes, froze 
the warm place under his balls, which were retreating into his pelvic cavity' (gaiman, 
2012: 263). in addition, for the character of shadow this attention to the extreme 
of temperature (even if uncomfortable) is instructive in a somaesthetic fashion. as 
shusterman notes, `attention to bodily movements and feelings can be useful in the 
learning process' (shusterman, 2012: 64). thus by bringing focus to his somatic condition, shadow (once he is rescued by a kindly police officer) is able to focus on his 
body as a way of getting his bearings in the town and as a means by which to subvert 
the memories of the last time he was in a police cruiser. in this way shadow is `able 
to monitor the unreflective ways [his] our body performs' as shadow is learning to 
function in his new role as a free man (shusterman, 2012: 64).

the final home for the protagonist in the text is the tree that shadow hangs from 
as a remembrance for wednesday (who at this point is revealed as an emanation    

 13 
of odin). this home takes shadow through various stages of somatic consciousness; 
day one is filled only with discomfort as his body adjusts to his new home and the 
idea that he is hanging from a rather large tree. shadow notes, `if he flopped forward, 
then the rope around his neck would take up the slack and the world would shim mer and swim' and that `the bark of the tree was rough against his back' (gaiman, 
2012: 457). what gaiman is doing is writing in a fashion that moves the reader to 
a point where they can potentially feel some level of these somatic responses. in a 
sense, gaiman is using the reader's visceral cognition (or interoception) as a way to 
solidify the connection of reader to character. oliver cameron describes this sort of 
interoceptive response as `the ability of visceral afferent information to either reach 
awareness and/or to directly or indirectly affect behaviour' (2002: 3). as such, with 
regards to interoception, when the viscera are influenced by external stimuli, their 
reaction to said stimulation reaches the level of consciousness in the experiencer. 
shadow's body is transformed and reduced in this space from a cognitive sensory 
object, one that became the sensation as when he `no longer felt the cold, or rather, 
he felt only, but the cold had now become part of himself, it belonged to him and he 
belonged to it' (gaiman, 2012: 459). in this way the cold helps shadow towards an 
eventual transcendence since this new relationship with his surroundings challenges 
some dominant notions of the body, such as when shusterman suggests that, `as an 
object of care, the body will be representationally exteriorized as a mere physical 
thing . . . in contrast to the inner living spirit' (shusterman, 2008: 27). shadow's body 
is not simply `the dead thing, the `corpus'', but rather has become part of one of the 
forces of nature and via this transformation, the world tree that he is strapped to 
eventually gives way to a more interesting realm that is constructed from his pain 
and sensation (shusterman, 2008: 27). 

space, bodies and gods
space and place are at the heart of how the characters known as the "old gods" 
make the transition to their new places of (much reduced) power in gaiman's   
america. when shadow first travels to meet mr ibis and his associate mr jaquel   

14
(himself modelled on the egyptian god anubis) who is rendered at times as a talking 
black dog with a long snout, we are told that the city called cairo, il (pronounced 
kay-roh) mirrors the river delta structure of cairo in egypt (gaiman, 2012). in addi tion, ibis and jaquel work as funeral home attendants, which is in line with anubis' 
association with mummification and the afterlife and thoth who is the scribe of 
the underworld (gaiman, 2012: 180). in this way these old gods parallel the func tions they performed in the old world and thus recontextualise their importance and 
function in america. their work with the bodies of the dead is also a clear link to the 
importance of the soma for egyptian gods of the underworld and suggests that they 
must stay close to this trade in order to maintain what little power they have left. 
the jackal is a renowned hunter and is more famous for its scavenger like behaviour 
and the eating of carrion. the ibis's relationship with scavenging is perhaps a bit 
more complex. as a bird that feeds on carrion eaters it too is directly dependant on 
death to sustain life. thus the corporeal forms of these gods are closely linked with 
the functions they perform and as these forms are mimicked in their american representations they can be read as closely aligned with these same somatic functions. by 
having both a body, a job and a home that are connected to the ideas of the afterlife 
and the preservation and veneration of the dead these old gods are more than simply 
powerless echoes of their past, they are their own embodied history. 

these old gods of egypt are giving way to a new god from jerusalem and so it 
is important to consider the way in which america's most powerful new god (jesus) 
is rendered in the text. gaiman notes in the appendix to the revised author's pre ferred text that he had been, `looking forward to writing the meeting of shadow and 
jesus for most of the book' but that the task was too grand and ultimately did not 
fit within the structure of the story. he refers to the scene (which is included in the 
appendix in the first version of the author's preferred text but is included in a 2012 
reprint merged with the primary text) that takes place while shadow is hanging in 
vigil as apocryphal. for this discussion we need only consider how jesus' body and 
his surroundings interact. the now americanised saviour is dressed in a fashion that 
is distinctly american (he is wearing a baseball cap) yet the description also evokes 
images of the biblical jesus, `tanned, slender, a beard' but perhaps most striking is 

 15 
the description of jesus' hand as `one callused hand--the fingers were etched with 
old chisel scars' (gaiman, 2012: 464). the calluses and the chisel scars are clearly 
designed to be evocative of both his hardscrabble life in ancient israel and they also 
seem to solidify the idea that he was a trained carpenter. these details are in keeping 
with much of the mythos of christ; his earthly father (joseph) is referenced as being 
a simple carpenter and in the traditions of the day jesus would have followed in his 
father's footsteps. what is striking is the omission of the stigmata (or marks from the 
crucifixion), which would be the most tangible and visible marker of christ's identity 
to be carried by his body. while it is true that, depending on the location of the gods 
in the world of the novel, nearly all of them can manipulate their bodies and appearances to either standout or blend in, while certain aspects of their physical form 
seem to be almost unchangeable. for example, the character of mr ibis (modelled 
on the egyptian god thoth) is described as a `crane-like man' thus showing how his 
appearance in the material world of the text mirrors his godlike appearance (gaiman, 
2012: 179). in this way the bodies of the characters are inscribed with elements of 
their mythologised personae yet they are often softened in order to not generate 
too much attention in the fictionalised america of the novel. this example seems to 
make the omission of the stigmata particularly interesting and while gaiman notes 
that he had intended to write a much longer piece involving jesus and shadow one 
can not help but understand that a writer of gaiman's calibre is an expert at leaving 
out details as much as he is about including them. the space that christ inhabits 
is reminiscent of a late 1990s mcmansion a `spanish-style building . . . adobe corri dor . . . open courtyard . . . water gardens and the fountains,' the adobe colour while 
prominent in the southwest of america hearkens to the arid browns and reds of the 
middle east (gaiman, 2012: 464). in addition, the material prosperity that is indicated 
by this home would be accurate given christianity's privileged place in america. the 
opulent (or at least upper middle-class) home would place the figure of christ among 
the group that, ideally, would wield the most power in the united states, thus reflecting the life and homes of his followers.

in american gods the homes that these beings inhabit are not simply constructed 
as structures but rather, through the lens of somaesthetics and its connection with 

16
architecture, we can see how these bodies-at-home shape and construct their spaces 
for literary and interoceptive effect. this effect is calculated to make the reader feel, 
or at least imagine, in a way that might strengthen the message's transmission but 
also creates a sense of closeness with the characters in the story. in different places 
and different structures these characters function in a way that is consistent with the 
realms of their godly dominion. it is through gaiman's constructions and descrip tions of their bodies in space that the narrative gets much of it power. while the 
characters construct spaces that are relevant to how the followers of their respective 
religions would understand them, they are also cast as completely american, with 
the ideas of home as a sanctuary, a place of power and in truly american fashion, a 
place of sovereignty and autonomy over both their surroundings and bodies. this 
allows the gods (both old and new) to create homes that are comfortable and famil iar thus embodying the american dream, while the protagonist constructs his final 
home in an act of sacrifice that in itself becomes an act of power mediated through 
his body.

on the surface,  american gods  is a tale of migration, assimilation and power, 
expertly cloaked within the confines of a fantasy novel. while all of this is certainly 
true it is clear that gaiman's text has deeper resonances around the issues of home, 
identity and the body. a close examination of some of the points of connection 
between the various factions and characters in this novel reveals specific elements of 
the american experience, both native and immigrant. characters in the novel embody 
many of the archetypal figures found in stories since time immemorial, however, by 
constructing a character like shadow moon, gaiman gives the reader a figure who 
is engaged in somatic introspection from his incarceration through to his vigil in 
yggdrasil. along his journey shadow visits many homes and in each one a new physical and mental challenge emerges giving him the opportunity to utilise his docile, 
malleable body as a vehicle for true spiritual growth. shadow becomes, by the end of 
the story, more human than human as he has achieved a level of transcendence that 
defies a dualistic understanding of the body-mind problem. his hero's journey is only 
possible because of the connections between body, mind and place (namely homes) 
that are clearly evident in american gods. by using critical methods that are focused 

 17 
on the use and importance of the body for mental and spiritual growth these crucial 
underlying and subtle points in the text have been examined in order to provide a 
new perspective on this novel. 

competing interests
the author declares that they have no competing interests.

references
bachelard, g 1969 the poetics of space: the classic look at how we experience inti mate places. trans by jolas, m. boston: beacon.
burroughs, w  and  odier, d  1989  the job: interviews with william s. burroughs .  

new york: penguin.
cameron, o  2002  visceral sensory neuroscience: interoception . new york: oxford 

university press.
carroll, s  2012 imagined nation: place and national identity in neil gaiman's 

american gods. extrapolation, 53(3): 307-326. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3828/
extr.2012.17
cass, s 2015  how much does the internet weigh?  discovermagazine.com. discover 

magazine. available at:  http://discovermagazine.com/2007/jun/how-muchdoes-the-internet-weigh [last accessed 23 jun. 2014].
fontanilla, d, johannessen, m, hajipour, a, cozzi, n, jackson, m and ruoho, a 

2009 the hallucinogen n,n-dimethyltryptamine (dmt) is an endogenous 
sigma-1 receptor regulator.  science, 323(5916): 934-937. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.1166127
foucault, m 1991 discipline and punish: the birth of the prison. trans by sheridan, a. 

new york: vintage.
gaiman, n 2012 american gods: the tenth anniversary edition. london: headline.
geiger, j  2003 chapel of extreme experience: a short history of stroboscopic light 

and the dream machine. brooklyn, ny: soft skull press.
la mettrie, j 2012 man--machine. trans by bennett, j. available at: http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/pdfs/lamettrie1748.pdf [last accessed 20 jun. 2014].

2
introduction: the ontology of mass killing
this paper will deploy gilles deleuze and fe'lix guattari's geophilosophy to read 
the political economy of contemporary cambodia as a stratum that emerged from 
the deterritorializing mechanisms of the khmer rouge genocide and politicide. the 
recent documentary  enemies of the people  (2010) offers a cinematic space for the 
unpunished and now-elderly executioners of democratic kampuchea to share their 
memories of these foundational events of mass murder, thereby forcing ruptures in 
the body politic of cambodia through their revelations of the violent processes of 
deterritorialization that allowed the emergence of this high-growth southeast asian 
economy. the paper will proceed by examining the double articulation of stratifica tion in cambodia, thereby excavating the bodies hidden by the processes of reterri torialization and overcoding, and will conclude with a speculative look at what these 
cinematic ruptures portend for becoming-cambodia.

before examining the cambodian genocide and politicide, this paper will 
first consider the ontology of mass killing. the approach is through deleuze and 
guattari's geophilosophy, which offers a fresh way to regard this vexed question. in a 
thousand plateaus (1987), deleuze and guattari draw on geological and other physical processes to better understand the transformation of, among other phenomena, 
human societies. delanda (1995) reminds us that their use of physical examples is 
not metaphorical:

when we say (as marxists used to say) that "class struggle is the motor of 
history" we are using the word "motor" in a purely metaphorical sense. 
however, when we say that "a hurricane is a steam motor" we are not 
simply making a linguistic analogy: rather we are saying that hurricanes 
embody the same diagram used by engineers to build steam motors, that 
is, that it contains a reservoir of heat, that it operates via thermal differ ences and that it circulates energy and materials through a (so-called) 
carnot cycle.
  (para. 6)

 3 
the diagram that delanda mentions consists of the abstraction of the arrangement 
of the physical components and forces within a particular assemblage and its prod ucts, such that it is "a map of the function of an assemblage," namely the production 
of "affects and effects" (livesey, 2010: 18). in delanda's example, the arrangement 
of the components and forces within a hurricane can be abstracted to the same 
arrangement of components and forces, and the forces thereby produced, within a 
steam engine.

insofar as countries can be seen as vast assemblages of components and forces 
(ranging from the individual bodies of their inhabitants and smaller-scale assem blages like societies, institutions and markets, to the natural forces of climate and 
geology, as well as social forces, including culture, politics and economics), they too 
may be abstracted to complex diagrams that similarly map the formation of largescale structures in the physical world; for example, geological strata and meshworks. 
at one level, the formation of social hierarchies can be abstracted to the same dia gram that corresponds to geological stratification: the "double articulation" of sedi mentation and folding, through which new forces emerge from the sorting of an 
undifferentiated mass into distinct layers of related physical components (bonta & 
protevi, 2004: 151). in the complex forces that drove the growth of cities like phnom 
penh--including the flows of migration, trade, and colonization--one may discern 
the abstract diagram of stratification. at a broader temporal level, stratification may 
be discerned in not just the historical formation of social hierarchies, but also in 
the complex formation and transformation of political economies. at this level of 
analysis, the political economy of a territory prior to colonization may be seen to constitute a stratum that is buried below that of the colonial period, and likewise, the 
political economy of the period of independence may be seen as being built on the 
stratum of the colonial political economy. in this same way, one may view neoliberal 
cambodia as emerging from the stratum of its revolutionary period of genocide and 
politicide. to understand how mass killing enables one stratum to change to another, 
one has to shift to the level of the individual body. delanda (2008) reminds us that 
"politically it is impossible to effect any real social change if the targets of one's 

4
interventions are non-existent entities" (176). bodies are physical entities through 
which change may be effected by their deployment or elimination. in such a grim 
logic, should specific assemblages of bodies be identified as constituting impedi ments to desired change, their physical removal from the greater assemblage of the 
state may hence be warranted. the planners of democratic kampuchea understood 
this lesson, and effected social change through the brutal and rigorous elimination 
of hundreds of thousands of troublesome bodies.

troublesome bodies
while the actual number of victims of democratic kampuchea's revolution of 
1975-79 will probably never be known, heuveline's (1998) demographic analysis 
concludes that violent deaths during this period range from "a minimum of 1.1   
million and a maximum of 2.2 million, with a medium estimate of 1.4 million" (60). 
the mass killings in cambodia during the democratic kampuchea period straddle 
politicide and genocide. as ea (2005) notes, pol pot's democratic kampuchea regime 
recognized two distinct groups of enemies: external and internal. the external ene mies primarily consisted of global capitalist powers, in particular the us and thai land, but also rival socialist powers, primarily the soviet union and vietnam. as a 
khmer rouge cadre recorded of the party line:

the new strategic line fixes the enemies of the revolution: the cia, kgb, and 
the yuon [vietnamese] running dogs. the yuon running dogs are especially 
vicious and dangerous to the revolution.
  (ea, 2005: 3-4)

the political campaign against the enemy vietnamese and their alleged cambodian 
allies quickly transformed into genocide against ethnic minorities, as thet sambath 
and rob lemkin's  enemies of the people  (2009) documents. in a segment of the 
documentary featuring sinoeun, a genocide survivor, she discusses her discovery of 
a planning document belonging to her commune chief that ordered local khmer 
rouge cadres to "find and eliminate all ethnic minority people," for the reason that 
"they are vietnamese supporters." in another segment, sambath interviews em, who 

 5 
led a group of khmer rouge killers during the democratic kampuchea period. she 
admits to having received orders from senior officials to "solve" the "ethnic minority 
problem." this solution involved rooting out and murdering these "traitors" and their 
"associates." suon, one of em's killers, observes that em cannot remember how many 
were killed simply because "there were so many." the cham muslim minority was 
especially targeted for extermination. osman (2002) estimates 400,000 to 500,000 
cham muslim deaths during the democratic kampuchea period, and that "their mortality rate was double to nearly triple that of the general khmer population" (2).

apart from genocide, politicide also occurred during the democratic kampuchea 
period (hamilton, 2013: 173). these mass killings targeted the regime's internal ene mies, of whom two sub-groups can be distinguished. the first consisted of "soldiers 
and police of the lon nol regime, and those in the feudalist and capitalist classes." 
these class enemies also included "those in the bourgeois class or who leaned toward 
capitalism" (ea, 2005: 5). indeed, de walque's (2005) demographic analysis confirms 
that "individuals with an urban or educated background were more likely to die, 
establishing that they were especially targeted" (351). the second sub-group of internal enemies consisted of khmer rouge cadres who were suspected of treason (ea, 
2005: 4). pol pot's secret s-21 prison was the site of the torture and murder of at least 
12,000 of these internal enemies, about 600 of whom were former s-21 guards who 
had fallen under suspicion (lim, 2013a: 109, 112). the horrifying segment of rithy 
panh's s-21: the khmer rouge killing machine  (2003) where the torturer prak khan 
confesses his sadistic interrogation of the doomed medic nay nan reveals the para noia of the khmer rouge party center, in particular its proclivity to identify--without 
any evidence--hitherto innocent individuals as members of vast counterrevolutionary 
conspiracies, and to subsequently "smash" these invented enemies (lim, 2012: 124).

given the heterogeneity of killers and victims, each of whom exists or existed as 
a haecceity with his or her own facticity and spatiotemporal history, spatial and temporal variations can be observed in the mass killings of the democratic kampuchea 
period. each space and event of mass killing should hence be considered as a unique 
assemblage. chandler (1993) highlights the temporal and regional variations in liv ing conditions across democratic kampuchea, where the eastern zone, for example, 

6
transformed over time from "one of the most humane in dk to one of the most brutal" (271). indeed, the act of genocide or politicide can be seen as a function of "absolute deterritorialization," which as bonta and protevi (2004) warn, "can also overcode 
the earth in the worst of all dangers, the fascist state" (79). deleuze and guattari 
(1987) observe that at this point of deterritorializing intensity, "the lines of flight 
are not only obstructed and segmented but turn into lines of destruction or death" 
(510). the act of genocidal or politicidal deterritorialization erases the assemblages 
constituted by the destroyed enemy bodies, and this is followed by the overcoding 
that creates new assemblages to replace the old:

the state apparatus can act directly on any stratum of human society, any 
regime of signs, and any ecosystem. it has and is the force and power to 
overcode anything, to put anything to work, to turn anything into stock . . . 
once resonating, the overcoded territories can be stratified and organized in 
numerous ways, segmented and striated to the limits of human tolerance.

  (bonta & protevi, 2004: 148-149)

just as the addition of an alkali interrupts the chemical reaction between an acid 
and a metal, thereby transforming the chemical outcome, the targeted mass kill ing of large groups of identified enemies interrupts the regular functioning of the 
political economy, giving those responsible for the killings vast opportunities to 
reshape it. at the level of the alloplastic stratum, "where the creative production 
of signs constructs territories" (bonta & protevi, 2004: 51), democratic kampuchea 
overcoded the victims of its mass killings as enemies of the people who deserved 
their violent deaths. the abject corpses of these victims hence served as corporeal 
warnings against challenging the state. as schwartz (2013) reminds us, "the corpse 
combines the organic material of the body with the symbolic power of death" (1). 
however, this overcoding by the state is not absolute, and corpses may be recoded 
with other meanings (14). after the fall of the democratic kampuchea regime in 
1979 to the invading vietnamese, the vietnamese-backed people's republic of 
kampuchea (prk) regime indeed did recode the corpses of democratic kampu  7 
chea's victims literally as signifiers of the evils of the "pol pot and ieng sary clique" 
in memorial spaces like the tuol sleng museum for genocidal crime as well as 
events like the national day of hatred (lim, 2013a: 127-128; de nike, quigley, and 
robinson, 2000).

democratic kampuchea's mass murder of "troublesome" people--the country's 
educated and capitalist elite--allowed pol pot to shut down the capitalist institu tions of money and markets, thereby transforming cambodia into an agrarian maoist 
political economy. the mass graves where these bodies were buried mark the socialist stratum of the cambodian political economy. this socialist stratum in turn would 
eventually be buried under a new stratum of neoliberal capitalism. after the 3 years, 
8 months and 20 days of genocide and politicide, pol pot's democratic kampuchea 
finally fell on january 7, 1979 to the vietnamese, who promptly set up their puppet 
prk regime. the young leaders of the prk not only had to fill the power vacuum 
caused by the retreat of pol pot's forces to the thai-cambodian border, they also 
had to reconstruct the apparatuses of government in the absence of the murdered 
educated class. the prk's gradual reintroduction of the capitalist institutions of 
money and markets helped restabilize the economy, and this facilitated cambodia's 
official transition to neoliberal capitalism in the 1990s with its implementation of 
"washington consensus" structural adjustment policies, including the privatization 
of its state-owned enterprises. unlike other developing countries which suffered economic calamity after undergoing structural adjustment, cambodia's transition was 
a success, and it has subsequently become one of the world's fastest growing economies (lim, 2013b: 61-63; lim, 2014b: 86-89). however, the prk's reintroduction 
of money and markets also facilitated the emergence of patronage networks that 
survived the country's transition to neoliberal capitalism and which persist to the 
present day (lim, 2013a: 29).

following the paris peace agreements of october 1991, the united nations established a transitional authority that nominally governed cambodia until the general 
elections of 1993. as widyono (2008) points out, the agreements were flawed; in 
particular by ignoring the reality of the state of cambodia's (soc, formerly the prk) 
firm control over the apparatuses of power in the country (35-42). this enabled 

8
the leaders of the prk/soc to survive the transition to the neoliberal state, where, 
in their new incarnation as the cambodian people's party (cpp), they have not only 
maintained their control over the political economy, but also survived opposition 
challenges to their continued rule, most notably in their defeat in july 1997 of the 
military challenge from the royalist funcinpec party (lim, 2013a: 30-31; widyono, 
2008: 253-259). the ruling elites of the cpp have used their long period of politi cal control to consolidate their networks of patronage. as slocomb (2006) notes: 
"two decades of nepotism and carefully arranged marriages among families of the 
ruling elites have created a web of alliances which many fear, if dismantled, would 
bring down with it the whole structure of the state" (390). indeed, these networks 
of patronage have created a kleptocratic shadow state that continues to plague 
cambodia to this day (global witness, 2007: 6-8; rollet, 2014).

cinematic rupture
in the alloplastic stratum, the political and economic transformation of cambodia 
that followed its revolutionary period of mass killing was accompanied by occlusions 
of memory. among the survivors, the killings became open secrets that were seldom 
spoken of. the cambodian state, for its part, politicized the official memory of these 
killings. parr (2006) reminds us that minoritarian memories can be reterritorialized 
by the majoritarian state as official history:

memory, for deleuze, can be either a reterritorialising movement or the 
double becoming of history. for instance the memory that collects the 
memories of minorities is described as a `majoritarian agency' that colonises 
minoritarian memory . . . or, finding investment in the form of history memory enters into circulation with exchange and commodity value at which 
point it once again turns into a powerful reterritorialising movement. so 
when deleuze and guattari describe becoming as `antimemory' what they 
are referring to is the reterritorialising function of memory that integrates 
the molecular memories of children, women and blacks into a majoritarian 
system of history.
 (128)

 9 
for the killers, their acts of mass killing served as a constitutive secret that bound 
them together, prompting them to "maintain an order of appearances" (dean, 2002: 
41). this silencing of the killers' voices would have a range of effects on the postgenocidal political order. after their successful invasion of cambodia, vietnam 
transformed pol pot's secret s-21 prison into the tuol sleng museum for genocidal 
crime, both to vilify the ousted khmer rouge government as well as to valorize the 
vietnamese invaders. this politicization of official memory has been accompanied 
with the occlusion of personal memory. many survivors of democratic kampuchea 
have chosen "not to share with their children their traumatic memories," thereby 
contributing to a rise in myths and genocide denial among cambodia's youth. with 
a history textbook on the democratic kampuchea period only entering the offi cial school curriculum in 2009, this long occlusion of memory has contributed to 
the paranoid strand of khmer anti-vietnamese racism that libels vietnam as being 
responsible for democratic kampuchea's killing fields (lim, 2010: para. 39; lim, 
2013a: 65-66, 109-110). this occlusion of memory is the target of the khmer rouge 
killers showcased in enemies of the people. two of the now-elderly killers, khoun and 
suon, explain that they have agreed to confess their acts of murder on camera for 
the purpose of recording the truth of what happened under the pol pot regime. as 
suon points out, if they choose to remain silent, "we will be gone soon and the new 
generation won't know the story." the confessions of khoun, suon, and the other 
khmer rouge killers in  enemies of the people  constitute cinematic ruptures in that 
they generate breaks in the silences and occlusions surrounding the genocide and 
politicide that shape today's cambodia.

in terms of affect, the power of  enemies of the people  lies in its intense focus 
on the ordinariness of the killers: thet sambath's frequent close-ups of their faces 
present the viewer with faces that look just like those one would find on the streets 
of cambodia's cities like phnom penh or in the cambodian countryside. the confes sional words that these men utter are horrifying precisely because their faces are so 
ordinary. in effect, the viewer is presented with the disorienting disconnect between 
the deleuzian regime of signs constituted by language and the structure of social 
coherence constituted by the abstract machines of faciality. as bogue (2003) reminds 

10
us, language constitutes a regime of signs which "forms individual subjects and places 
them in social and political relation to one another" (83). the verbal confessions of 
khoun, suon, and their fellow khmer rouge killers hence immediately identify them 
as the unrehabilitated and unpunished homicidal functionaries of the democratic 
kampuchea regime, whose continued freedom makes a mockery of the ongoing proceedings of the khmer rouge tribunal. the face constitutes a different regime of 
signs. the abstract machines of faciality allow us to organize our world by connecting 
"elements into regular assemblages . . . thus establishing structures of coherence." 
the subject's world is hence formed when a sufficient set of such assemblages cohere 
together, and deleuzian territorialization occurs when a coherent set of such assem blages of meaning becomes privileged over contesting sets. it is this dominant regime 
of signs that counts as a "face." the human face offers a good illustration of the functioning of the deleuzian faciality machine qua primal frame of meaning, as the faces 
of human strangers are capable of drawing affective responses in the viewer including 
sexual attraction and the feelings of friendship, disgust, or fear. conversely, the neurological condition of prosopagnosia or face-blindness demonstrates the cognitive dys function that can occur when this abstract machine of faciality breaks down (deleuze 
and guattari, 1987: 172-173; bignall, 2012: 395; lim, 2013a: 106; sacks, 2010). in the 
case of  enemies of the people , the ordinary faces of the self-confessed killers rupture 
the viewer's hitherto coherent visual understanding of cambodian society by trig gering the realization that the faces of men one long assumed to be harmless may 
actually be undercoded: brutal killers may wear the masks of harmless faces. apart 
from the self-identified killers in enemies of the people, how many other khmer rouge 
killers walk free in cambodia today? the anxiety thus generated by the realization of 
the undercoding of the abstract machines of faciality can also be felt in rithy panh's 
s-21: the khmer rouge killing machine, when the viewer learns that many of the tor tured and murdered victims of the secret prison were in fact khmer rouge cadres who 
had fallen victim to the paranoid regime's frequent internal purges. indeed, experts 
estimate that at least 563 of the cadres who worked at s-21--a third of its personnel--
eventually ended up getting arrested, interrogated, and executed there. knowledge of 
this adds an indeterminacy to the tragic affect of viewing the prisoner mug-shots at 

 11 
the tuol sleng museum for genocidal crime, for the photographed faces of the pris oners do not reveal their lives before their fatal incarceration at s-21 (lim, 2012: 125; 
lim, 2013a: 109). which of these victims had served as s-21's interrogators or killers 
before they themselves had fallen afoul of the regime?

becoming-cambodia
writing of deleuze and guattari's notion of becoming-democratic, patton (2008) 
observes that "like all the concepts that philosophy invents or reinvents in order 
to counter-actualise the present, it enables us to perceive the world differently"   
(180-181). one way to understand this in the context of post-genocide cambodia 
is through the understanding of the state as "an apparatus of organisation, cap ture and exclusion, which stratifies, polices, striates, codes/decodes, territorialises/  
detteritorialises, interiorises, counts, occupies, controls and regulates" (watson, 2008: 
199). the brutal confessions of the khmer rouge killers in  enemies of the people serve 
to shatter the cambodian state's silence on the khmer rouge killers. in particular, 
their testimonies of the targeted slaughter of the vietnamese and other ethnic minorities contradict the aforementioned blood libel of the killing fields as being a product 
of vietnam rather than the khmer rouge. such confessions are especially important 
given that ethnic violence against the vietnamese and other ethnic minorities has 
long been a cyclical feature of cambodian history, and which still persists today. in the 
2013 general elections, for example, the opposition cambodia national rescue party 
deliberately "stoked anti-vietnamese sentiment, seeking to capitalize on long-ruling 
prime minister hun sen's association with vietnam." the anti-vietnamese racism that 
continues to poison cambodian ethnic relations today works partly on the deleuzian 
logic of faciality, with khmer mobs periodically attacking and killing those with viet namese faces (deleuze and guattari, 1987: 178-181; bignall, 2012: 396; lim, 2013a: 
83-85; lim, 2013b: 68; prak, 2014: para. 8; robertson, 2014: paras. 1-3). 

at another level, one may draw on deleuze's understanding of the present as 
constituted by both an actual and virtual present, the latter of which remains real 
even though it has not been actualized in the present moment. in this sense, the 
virtual present represents what the actual present could have been and could still 

12
be (deleuze, 1989: 79; deleuze, 1991: 96-7). in the same way that al-nakib (2014) 
traces the virtual presence of the missing palestinians of kuwait, one may try to trace 
the virtual presence of the missing cambodians of post-genocide cambodia. how do 
these estimated 1.1-2.2 million victims of the khmer rouge "coexist with the pre sent they once were and could yet become" (36)? at one level we have a hauntology. 
while holt (2012) has argued that pchum ben, the khmer festival of the dead, has 
taken on new significance after the khmer rouge genocide, becoming "the arena for 
the expression of actions that assuage the pains of a collective horror for some, and 
a way to manage a collective guilt for a few others" (10), guillou's (2012) fieldwork 
in two communes in the bakan district of pursat province--an area which suffered 
some of the worst violence during the democratic kampuchea period--reveals the 
development of peasant modes of remembering the genocide's dead and missing, 
especially the unknown dead who were interred in mass graves (208-209). guillou's 
informants describe these spirits as exhibiting behavior similar to those of the guardian spirits of the land ( neak ta), for example, punishing individuals for desecrating 
the land or for other acts of bad behavior (221). indeed, some cambodians have 
begun making offerings at these mass graves as a means of propitiation of angry 
spirits or to seek boons from what they perceive as powerful spirits. in this fashion, 
pol pot's grave has itself become a site of pilgrimage (224-225). this actual present, 
in turn, suggests possible futures for becoming-cambodia. as deleuze and guattari 
(1994) note:

the present, on the contrary, is what we are and, thereby, what already we 
are ceasing to be . . . it is not that the actual is the utopian prefiguration of a 
future that is still part of our history. rather, it is the now of our becoming.
 (112)

in his reading of deleuze's difference and repetition, bogue (2011) identifies the different modes of the future connected with deleuze's passive syntheses of time. of 
interest is the third synthesis of time, which tears an asymmetric cut in time, creating 

 13 
not just a "before" and "after," but also a temporal split in the subject. this temporal 
division in the subject is echoed in deleuze's notion of the people to come: "in the 
present there is no people, and the people to come,  le peuple a` venir , is only pos sible in some future that has not yet arrived" (78-79). the creation of the people 
to come is nothing less than the creation of new "modes of existence" and "new 
possibilities of life" (deleuze, 1997: 4; bogue, 2011: 89). in the case of post-genocide 
cambodia, what would the people to come look like? hybridity is key to understanding the possible futures for becoming-cambodia. in terms of deleuzian geophiloso phy, the process of hybridization is akin to the geological process of composition 
that assembles heterogenous components like fossils and minerals into limestone 
(bliss, hayes, and orris, 2012: 1). cambodia's past has likewise been shaped by the 
process of hybridization. this dates from the angkorean period, whose culture has 
been revealed by archeologists and historians to be hybrid and cosmopolitan, with 
influences from foreign merchants and missionaries from the lands of china and 
india mixed with those of indigenous traditions. in terms of religion, for example, 
the people of angkor practised brahmanism and mahayana buddhism alongside the 
indigenous worship of local ancestral spirits. this hybrid assemblage changed over 
time, with the influence of mahayana buddhism eventually supplanted by theravada 
buddhism (harris, 1999: 54; harris, 2005: 22-24; heder, 2007: 290; mabbett and 
chandler, 1995: 114-116). angkorean culture itself was eventually superseded by 
a regional hybrid culture that encompassed both the ethnic thai and khmer. even 
after the angkorean period, the precolonial khmer kings continued to recognize the 
multiculturalism of their realm as a sign of their royal power (chandler, 2008: 95; 
heder, 2007: 292).

today, new hybrid identities continue to be created in cambodia (lim, 2014a: 
492). one of the key hybridizing forces today is the cambodian diaspora, which has 
reshaped local cambodian culture through the influence of overseas cambodians 
like the cambodian-american rapper prach ly, or returnees from the diaspora like 
tuy sobil, whose school tiny toones promotes hybrid musical and dance forms 
like khmer hip-hop and khmer breakdancing (amery, 2011: paras. 7-13; mellen, 

14
2010: para. 26). the strong influence of american hip-hop culture in the current 
wave of hybridization reflects the urban lives of diasporic cambodian-americans 
like tee cambo and cs, whose rap music "reflects the gang culture and hard-knocks 
life that have characterized their experience" (bennett 2014, paras. 5-8; lee 2014, 
para. 1). some returnees do have backgrounds in american gang culture, for exam ple the aforementioned tuy sobil and the hip-hop poet kosal khiev, both of whom 
had been arrested and deported from the us (cheung, 2014: paras. 1-5; roy and 
mom, 2009: paras. 2-7). the cambodian-american communities from which these 
returnees were ejected were generally the result of the resettlement in the us of 
cambodian refugees from the civil war. hence these returnees offer outsiders not 
just a glimpse into the cambodian diaspora, but also a speculative look at their vir tual counterpart--the unscattered cambodian population consisting of the people 
who would have constituted cambodia today had the khmer rouge not come into 
power. at present, the intervention that began with tuy sobil and other returnees is 
currently expanding through the innovative work of new groups like wat a gwaan 
and sliten6ix, who are hybridizing cambodian music with other musical traditions 
like jamaican reggae and heavy metal (chan and ngo, 2010: paras. 1-3; lomas, 2014: 
para. 1; thompson, 2014: paras. 1-2). such fecund hybridization today is the latest 
cycle in a deleuzian spiral repetition dating from the cosmopolitanism and multiculturalism of the angkorean past.

while the ethnic vietnamese, as we have seen, remain cambodia's despised 
"other," this could change (villadiego, 2014). the mutating fate of cambodia's eth nic chinese shows a possible path forward for the ethnic vietnamese. during the 
democratic kampuchea period, the ethnic chinese were persecuted by the anticapitalist khmer rouge because of their pre-revolutionary capitalist activities. many 
chinese quickly learned that they had to pass as khmer in order to survive, and this 
occlusion of their ethnic identity continued even after the ouster of the pol pot 
regime in 1979. by 1991, when cambodia was on the cusp of its transition to neoliberal capitalism, few chinese "were willing to openly converse in chinese, or to share 
any claim to a chinese heritage or name, with an outsider" (edwards, 2012: 127-130). 

 15 
this "legacy of fear" has ended under the rule of the current royal government of 
cambodia, with the reemergence of the chinese press and institutions like associa tions, schools, and temples marking the ethnic chinese minority's confident reas sertion of their identity (edwards, 2009: 175). while the late king father norodom 
sihanouk did not include the chinese in his classificatory scheme of favored ethnic 
minorities who could be assimilated under an expanded definition of the khmer, 
cambodia's chinese have taken it upon themselves to designate their community as 
"khmer chen" (chinese khmer), performatively invoking their membership in the 
khmer nation (ehrentraut, 2011: 789).

a similar challenge by the ethnic vietnamese to claim their place in the 
cambodian nation would exemplify the ceaseless political struggle of the deleuzian 
"people to come," as the people to come is a people "perpetually generating dif ferences," with their politics defined "from within . . . as that people continues its 
becoming" (bogue, 2011: 90). the flows of capital that characterize cambodia's contemporary neoliberal political economy will be key factors in this generation of dif ference, as it is the tendency of such flows to challenge the state in their perpetual 
task of recoding all social flows into the commodity form (bogue, 2005: 19-20). the 
case of cambodia's ethnic chinese is again exemplary, as their confident reassertion 
of chineseness in the 1990s was a result of the entry of overseas chinese invest ment into the cambodian economy. this inflow of overseas chinese capital--itself 
a result of the neoliberalization of the cambodian political economy that emerged, 
as enemies of the people reminds us, from the khmer rouge genocide--was followed 
by an increase in inbound migration from china and taiwan, as well as strength ened political ties between beijing and phnom penh. these factors boosted the cul tural pride of cambodia's ethnic chinese, and led to their re-sinicization (heder, 
2007: 309). as nyi'ri (2012) notes, this surge in overseas chinese investment created 
employment opportunities for the ethnic chinese, especially as middlemen between 
the overseas chinese investors and the cambodian state, and between the chinese 
employers and their khmer employees (94). the ethnic khmer themselves have 
been transformed by the arrival of overseas chinese capital. entrepreneurial khmer 

16
businesspeople are increasingly enrolling in mandarin language classes, as they rec ognize that mandarin has become the new language of business in cambodia and 
the region (verver, 2012: 31-32). increased flows of capital from vietnam could have 
similarly beneficial effects for cambodia's ethnic vietnamese. one of the popular anti- 
vietnamese stereotypes in cambodia is of the vietnamese as economic exploiters of 
the khmer people (lim, 2013a: 60-63). the establishment of vietnamese enterprises 
in cambodia that create jobs with decent wages, if done in sufficient numbers, could 
effectively recode the vietnamese people in the cambodian imagination as good 
neighbours and economic partners. this would also set an important precedent 
for future foreign direct investment as neoliberal cambodia is a magnet for international capital precisely because of the low cost of cambodian labour. cambodia's 
garment sector--which has become the country's primary export sector--offers wages 
that are so low that wages in the sex industry appear as attractive to the underpaid 
garment workers (alvi, 2014). this optimistic possible future for cambodia's ethnic 
vietnamese, if actualized, would mark a significant departure from the spiral rep etition of ethnic violence that characterizes cambodia's deep history, of which the 
khmer rouge genocide was just a recent iteration (lim, 2013a: 68-69).

returning to geophilosophy, one may be reminded that while cambodia is an 
exemplary case of a neoliberal economy built on a stratum of mass killings, it is 
unfortunately not unique in southeast asia. joshua oppenheimer's recent docu mentaries the act of killing (2012) and the look of silence (2014) reveal the parallel 
case of indonesia, whose politicide of 1965-66 helped establish the foundation of 
the country's neoliberal economy (ransom, 1970: 48-49; klein, 2008: 85). these 
events of mass killing were not the last to occur in southeast asia. today in myanmar, 
state-sponsored violence against the rohingya muslim minority that amounts, in the 
eyes of some experts, to a "slow-burning genocide," serves to consolidate majoritar ian buddhist control over the liberalizing economy (maung zarni & cowley, 2014: 
684-686; shams & wolf, 2015: para. 7). a clear-sighted recognition of the violent 
foundations of southeast asia's high growth economies will be necessary for the 
region to find an ethical path for its future development. a political economy built 

 17 
on a stratum of mass killing is not destined to fall into a spiral repetition of violence, 
as its people to come may decide on a better course.

competing interests
the author declares that they have no competing interests.

references
al-nakib, m 2014 `the people are missing': palestinians in kuwait.  deleuze studies, 

8(1): 23-44. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/dls.2014.0132
alvi, s 2014 the high cost of cheap clothes.  vice news. available at  https://news.

vice.com/video/the-high-cost-of-cheap-clothes [last accessed 1 june 2015].
amery, c 2011 unique approach to youths at risk.  phnom penh post . available at 

http://www.phnompenhpost.com/special-reports/unique-approach-youthsrisk [last accessed 1 june 2015].
bennett, s  2014 cambodian rap is starting to blow up in long beach.  la weekly. 

available at http://www.laweekly.com/westcoastsound/2014/07/30/cambodianrap-is-starting-to-blow-up-in-long-beach [last accessed 1 june 2015].
bignall, s  2012 dismantling the face: pluralism and the politics of recognition. 

deleuze studies, 6(3): 389-410. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/dls.2012.0071
bliss, j d, hayes, t s and orris, g j 2012 limestone: a crucial and versatile industrial mineral commodity.  u.s. geological survey . available at  http://pubs.usgs.
gov/fs/2008/3089/fs2008-3089.pdf [last accessed 1 june 2015].
bogue, r 2003 deleuze on music, painting and the arts. new york: routledge.
bogue, r 2005 nomadic flows: globalism and the local absolute. concentric: literary 

and cultural studies,  31(1): 7-25. available at  http://www.concentric-literature.
url.tw/issues/flows/2.pdf [last accessed 1 june 2015].
bogue, r  2011 deleuze and guattari and the future of politics: science fiction, 

protocols and the people to come.  deleuze studies, 5(supplement): 77-97. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/dls.2011.0038
bonta, m  and  protevi, j  2004  deleuze and geophilosophy: a guide and glossary . 

edinburgh: edinburgh university press.

18
chan, s  and  ngo, m  2010 hip hop teens.  phnom penh post .  http://www.

phnompenhpost.com/lift/hip-hop-teens [last accessed 1 june 2015].
chandler, d  1993 the tragedy of cambodian history: politics, war, and revolution 

since 1945. chiang mai: silkworm books.
chandler, d 2008 a history of cambodia. boulder: westview press.
cheung, h 2014 kosal khiev's journey from prison to poetry. bbc news. http://www.

bbc.com/news/world-asia-24923096 [last accessed 1 june 2015].
de nike, h j, quigley, j and robinson, k j 2000 genocide in cambodia: documents 

from the trial of pol pot and ieng sary . philadelphia, pa: university of pennsylva nia press. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.9783/9780812205466
de walque, d  2005 selective mortality during the khmer rouge period in cam bodia. population and development review , 31(2): 351-368. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2005.00069.x
dean, j 2002 publicity's secret: how technoculture capitalizes on democracy. ithaca, 

ny: cornell university press.
delanda, m  1995 the geology of morals: a neomaterialist interpretation.  virtual futures   95. available at  http://www.egs.edu/faculty/manuel-de-landa/ 
articles/the-geology-of-morals-a-neomaterialist-interpretation [last accessed 1 
june 2015].
delanda, m 2008 deleuze, materialism and politics. in: buchanan, i and thoburn, n 

(eds.). deleuze and politics. edinburgh: edinburgh university press, pp. 160-177. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/edinburgh/9780748632879.003.0008
deleuze, g  1989  cinema 2: the time-image , trans. tomlinson, h and galeta, r.   

minneapolis, mn: university of minnesota press. 
deleuze, g 1991 bergsonism, trans. tomlinson, h and habberjam, b. new york: zone 

books. pmcid: pmc52341.
deleuze, g  1997  essays critical and clinical , trans. smith, d w and greco, m a.   

minneapolis, mn: university of minnesota press. pmcid: pmc1159532.
deleuze, g and  guattari, f 1987 a thousand plateaus: capitalism and schizophre nia, trans. massumi, b. minneapolis, mn: university of minnesota press.

 19 
deleuze, g  and  guattari, f  1994  what is philosophy?  trans. tomlinson, h and 

burchell, g. new york: columbia university press. pmcid: pmc1049922.
ea, m t 2005 the chain of terror: the khmer rouge southwest zone security system . 

phnom penh: documentation center of cambodia. pmcid: pmc1257419.
edwards, p  2009 ethnic chinese in cambodia. in: hean, s (ed.)  ethnic groups in 

cambodia. phnom penh: center for advanced study, pp. 174-233.
edwards, p  2012 sojourns across sources: unbraiding sino-cambodian histories. 

cross-currents: east asian history and culture review,  4: 118-136. available at 
https://cross-currents.berkeley.edu/e-journal/issue-4/edwards-endnote [last 
accessed 1 june 2015].
ehrentraut, s 2011 perpetually temporary: citizenship and ethnic vietnamese in 

cambodia.  ethnic and racial studies,  34(5): 779-798. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/01419870.2010.537359
global witness 2007 cambodia's family trees: illegal logging and the stripping of 

public assets by cambodia's elite . available at  http://www.globalwitness.org/
sites/default/files/pdfs/cambodias_family_trees_low_res.pdf [last accessed 1 
june 2015].
guillou, a y 2012 an alternative memory of the khmer rouge genocide: the dead of 

the mass graves and the land guardian spirits [neak ta]. south east asia research, 
20(2): 207-226. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5367/sear.2012.0102
hamilton, a  2013 cambodian genocide: ethics and aesthetics in the cinema of 

rithy panh. in: bangert, a, gordon, r s c and saxton, l (eds.)  holocaust intersections: genocide and visual culture at the new millennium . oxford: legenda, pp. 
170-190. pmid: 23478079.
harris, i 1999 buddhism in extremis: the case of cambodia. in: harris, i (ed.)  buddhism and politics in twentieth-century asia. london: continuum, pp. 54-78.
harris, i 2005  cambodian buddhism: history and practice . honolulu: university of 

hawaii press.
heder, s  2007 cambodia. in: simpson, a (ed.)  language and national identity in 

asia. oxford: oxford university press, pp. 288-311.

20
heuveline, p  1998 `between one and three million': towards the demographic 

reconstruction of a decade of cambodian history (1970-79).  population studies, 
52(1): 49-65. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0032472031000150176
holt, j c 2012 caring for the dead ritually in cambodia. southeast asian studies, 1(1): 

3-75. available at  http://englishkyoto-seas.org/wp-content/uploads/010101.
pdf [last accessed 1 june 2015].
klein, n 2008 the shock doctrine: the rise of disaster capitalism. new york: picador.
lee, e 2014 cambodian american hip hop artist sings of personal struggles.  voa. 

available at  http://www.voanews.com/content/cambodian-american-hip-hopartist-sings-of-personal-struggles/2423142.html [last accessed 1 june 2015].

lim, a c h 2010 breakfast with the dictator: memory, atrocity, and affect. theory & 

event,  13(4). available at  http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/theory_and_event/
v013/13.4.lim.html [last accessed 1 june 2015].

lim, a c h 2012 reassembling memory: rithy panh's s-21: the khmer rouge killing 

machine. in: opondo, s o and shapiro, m j (eds.)  the new violent cartography: 
geo-analysis after the aesthetic turn. new york: routledge, pp. 118-133.

lim, a c h 2013a cambodia and the politics of aesthetics. new york: routledge.
lim, a c h  2013b cambodia rising: neoliberal violence and development.  jati: 

journal of southeast asian studies, 18: 61-72. available at http://www.myjurnal.
my/public/article-view.php?id=75075 [last accessed 1 june 2015].
lim, a c h 2014a hybridity as heterochrony. world futures: the journal of new paradigm research,  70(8): 486-495. available at  http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
full/10.1080/02604027.2014.989781 [last accessed 1 june 2015].
lim, a c h  2014b the pedagogical subject of neoliberal development.  east-west 

affairs, 2(1), 85-96.
livesey, g 2010 assemblage. in: parr, a (ed.) the deleuze dictionary: revised edition. 

edinburgh: edinburgh university press, pp. 18-19.
lomas, e 2014 curated: kaztet dee on the emerging cambodian reggae dub scene. & of 

other things. available at http://www.andofotherthings.com/2014/07/07/curatedkaztet-dee-emerging-cambodian-reggae-dub-scene/ [last accessed 1 june 2015].

 21 
mabbett, i and chandler, d 1995 the khmers. oxford: blackwell.
maung, z and  cowley, a 2014 the slow-burning genocide of myanmar's rohingya. 

pacific rim law & policy journal,  23(3): 681-752. available at  https://digital.lib.
washington.edu/dspace-law/handle/1773.1/1377 [last accessed 1 june 2015].
mellen, g  2010 for cambodian rapper, `words are weapons.'  long beach press 

telegram. available at  http://www.presstelegram.com/technology/20100409/ 
for-cambodian-rapper-words-are-weapons [last accessed 1 june 2015].
nyi'ri, p 2012 investors, managers, brokers, and culture workers: how the `new' chinese are changing the meaning of chineseness in cambodia. cross-currents: east 
asian history and culture review,  4: 93-117. available at  https://cross-currents.
berkeley.edu/e-journal/issue-4/nyiri [last accessed 1 june 2015].
oppenheimer, j (director) 2014  the look of silence  [motion picture]. copenhagen: 

final cut for real.
oppenheimer, j, anonymous,  and cynn, c  (directors) 2012  the act of killing  

[motion picture]. copenhagen: final cut for real.
osman, y 2002 oukoubah: justice for the cham muslims under the democratic kampuchea regime. phnom penh: documentation center of cambodia.
panh, r  (director) 2003  s-21: the khmer rouge killing machine  [motion picture]. 

paris: institut national de l'audiovisuel and arte france cine'ma.
parr, a 2006 deterritorialising the holocaust. in: buchanan, i and parr, a (eds.) deleuze 

and the contemporary world . edinburgh: edinburgh university press, pp. 125-
145. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/edinburgh/9780748623419.003.0007
patton, p 2008 becoming-democratic. in: buchanan, i and thoburn, n (eds.) deleuze 

and politics, edinburgh: edinburgh university press, pp. 178-195. doi:  http://
dx.doi.org/10.3366/edinburgh/9780748632879.003.0009. pmid: 18489022.
prak, c t 2014 investors wary as anti-vietnamese feeling grows in cambodia.  reuters. available at  http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/04/29/us-cambodiaracism-idusbrea3r1cn20140429 [last accessed 1 june 2015].
ransom, d 1970 the berkeley mafia and the indonesian massacre.  ramparts, 9(4): 

27-29, 40-49. available at http://www.unz.org/pub/ramparts-1970oct-00027 
[last accessed 1 june 2015].

22
robertson, h  2014 researchers attempt to ease racial tensions.  the cambodia 

daily. available at  http://www.cambodiadaily.com/news/researchers-attemptto-ease-racial-tensions-67077/ [last accessed 1 june 2015].
rollet, c  2014 slight improvement in corruption ranking.  phnom penh post .  

available at  http://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/slight-improvementcorruption-ranking [last accessed 1 june 2015].
roy, e a and mom, k 2009 tiny toones' hip-hop breaks. phnom penh post. available 

at http://www.phnompenhpost.com/lifestyle/tiny-toones-hip-hop-breaks [last 
accessed 1 june 2015].
sacks, o  2010 face-blind: why are some of us terrible at recognizing faces?  the  

new yorker . available at  http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2010/08/30/
face-blind [last accessed 1 june 2015].
schwartz, m 2013 an iconography of the flesh: how corpses mean as matter. communication +1, 2 (1). available at  http://scholarworks.umass.edu/cpo/vol2/
iss1/1 [last accessed 1 june 2015].
shams, s and  wolf, s o  2015 myanmar's rohingya conflict `more economic than 

religious.'  deutsche welle . available at  http://www.dw.com/en/myanmarsrohingya-conflict-more-economic-than-religious/a-18496206 [last accessed 1 
june 2015].
slocomb, m  2006 the nature and role of ideology in the modern cambodian 

state.  journal of southeast asian studies,  37(3): 375-395. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/s0022463406000695
thet, s  and  lemkin, r  (directors) 2009  enemies of the people  [motion picture]. 

oxford: old street films.
thompson, n a  2014 punk rock in phnom penh.  roads & kingdoms . available 

at  http://roadsandkingdoms.com/2014/punk-rock-in-phnom-penh/ [last 
accessed 1 june 2015].
verver, m 2012 templates of `chineseness' and trajectories of cambodian chinese 

entrepreneurship in phnom penh. cross-currents: east asian history and culture 
review,  4: 23-51. available at  https://cross-currents.berkeley.edu/e-journal/
issue-4/verver [last accessed 1 june 2015].

2
on 18 october 1809, a letter signed by `minimus' appeared in the morning chronicle 
newspaper, a london daily. it was one month since a rebuilt covent garden thea tre had reopened, an event that had been met in the nights thereafter with riotous 
opprobrium from sections of london's populace. the letter, as so many had since 
the covent garden old price riots began, concerned the ongoing dispute between 
`the public and the management of covent-garden theatre.' as the name `old price' 
suggests, the riots were sparked by the dissatisfaction of london's theatregoers with 
the new price of admission to the theatre. as had been the case throughout the 
long eighteenth century, these theatregoers believed in the common ownership of 
theatre prices.1 the price of admission to covent garden theatre was especially sig nificant because it was one of only two royal patent theatres sanctioned to stage 
five-act spoken word drama within westminster, even though, in reality, the lord 
chamberlain's jurisdiction extended to the whole of london and its environs. 2 as 
drury lane, the other part of this patent duopoly, had burnt down on 24 february 
1809, the situation in mid-september was that the only patent theatre available to 
theatregoers was the reopened covent garden theatre and that the barrier to entering this theatre had increased.

by the time minimus wrote to the  morning chronicle,  the supporters of old 
prices (commonly known as `ops') had developed a panoply of complaints against 
the beleaguered covent garden theatre management. these included an architec tural redistribution of the theatre with new private boxes for the wealthy offset by a 
restricted and remodelled one-shilling gallery for the less well-off, the suspicion that 
the management had hired jewish pugilists to suppress the nightly riots inside the 
theatre, the selection of expensive foreign actors as lead players, claims of financial 
mismanagement and embezzlement, the heavy-handedness of the bow street `police' 
called in to handle disturbances, and the criminal charges brought against ops for 

 1  for the moral economy of theatre pricing, see an entry into james boswell's journal (f. pottle [ed.], 

boswell`s london journal, 1762-3 [new haven, 1950], 219) where a pseudo-fictional `citizen' of child's 
coffee-house muses `i remember when the common price of new plays was sixpence, and no more.'
 2  r. d. hume, `theatre as property in eighteenth-century london,' journal for eighteenth century studies 31.1 (2008); h. mcpherson, `theatrical riots' and cultural politics in eighteenth-century london,' 
the eighteenth century 43.3 (2002); d. worrall, theatric revolution: drama, censorship and romantic 
period subcultures, 1773-1832 (oxford: oxford university press, 2006), pp. 33-102.

 3 
such spurious crimes as having sung, whistled, or sneezed during a performance. in 
short, the ops were, by 18 october, rioting not because of an increase in admission 
price by itself but rather because of a perceived affront to their freedoms and asso ciated customary rights as `free-born englishmen.' 3 they were loyalists rather than 
radicals, pragmatists rather than theoreticians affronted, as they saw it, by the actions 
of a theatre management in league both with agents of state justice and with wealthy 
elites.

however, minimus did not, as many ops had and would, use his letter to address 
these issues directly. instead his purpose was to share with the public a passage from 
the farce eurydice hiss'd, written circa 1740 `by that able lawyer, upright magistrate, 
and learned man, henry fielding, esq. who was at the time he wrote it an eminent 
barrister, and afterwards placed at the head of the police of the city of westminster.' 
the selected passage reads thus:

dramatus persona
pillage, the manager. - honestus
pillage - o, on me ye gods bestow the pence,
  and give your fame to any fools you please!
honestus - your love of pence sufficiently you show,
  by raising still your prices on the town.
pil - the town for their own sakes those prices pay,
  which the additional expenses demands.
hon - in former times,
  when better actors acted better plays,
  the town paid less.

 3  the concept of the `free-born englishman' has a long heritage, stretching back to the seventeenth 

century and the levellers. it was revived in 1790s in response to restrictions to freedom and ero sions of privacy imposed on britons as a consequence of the french revolutionary wars, not least 
the suspension of  habeus corpus in 1794. see j. barrell,  the spirit of despotism: invasions of privacy 
in the 1790s  (oxford: oxford university press, 2006); g, cruikshank,  a free born englishman! 
the admiration of the world!!! and the envy of surrounding nations!!!!! (1819; british 
museum satires 13287a); b. hilton, a mad, bad, and dangerous people?: england 1783-1846 (oxford: 
oxford university press, 2006), pp. 65-74.

4
pil - we have more actors now.
hon - ay, many more, i`m certain, than you need,
  make your additional expence apparent.
  let it appear quite necessary too,
  and then perhaps they`ll grumble not to pay.
pil - what is a manager whom the public rule?
hon - the servant of the public, and no more;
  for tho` indeed you see the actors paid,
  yet from the people`s pockets come the pence;
  they therefore should decide what they
  will pay for.    [exit honestus]
pillage, solo - i wish i could have gain'd one honest
  man over to my side --------------------
  but since the attempt is vain,
  numbers must serve for worth: the vessel sails
  with equal rapid fury and success,
  borne by the foulest tide as clearest stream.

every op would have understood this choice of passage and could have related to 
its focus on prices and pay, on managerial extravagance and profiteering, on conflict 
over the `ownership' of theatrical space. as minimus himself noted with a hint of 
self-congratulation it was `so applicable to the point at issue' not only with regards 
to what it had said but who had said it. that minimus chose to quote a `lawyer, [...] 
magistrate, [...], barrister, and [...] head of the police,' and one of such esteem, sug gests that the law and those charged with its defence were integral to the discourses 
that surrounded the covent garden old price riots.4

 4  henry and his elder brother john fielding were both well known figures for their roles as magistrates, 

indeed henry has established the bow street office in 1749. see j. m. beattie,  the first english detectives: the bow street runners and the policing of london, 1750-1840 (oxford: oxford university press, 
2012); j. white, london in the eighteenth century: a great and monstrous thing (london: bodley head, 
2012), pp. 424-465.

 5 

letters addressing the events at covent garden theatre were published in newspapers throughout autumn-winter 1809 and continued until after the cessation of 
hostilities in january 1810. they were published because readers were fascinated 
with the covent garden old price riots, sixty-seven nights of protest often collec tively referred to as the op war. this demand is evident in the response of the major 
london dailies (morning chronicle, morning post, the times) and weeklies (examiner), 
who, catering for diverse metropolitan and provincial opinions, responded to these 
outbursts of collective action in a timely and voluminous manner.5 reports from the 
theatre, the bow street magistrates, other judicial venues or the streets appeared in 
most issues and related notices, advertisements, and letters from both readers and the 
covent garden theatre management were just as common. news of events at covent 
garden theatre was not restricted to the capital. old price riots-inspired tumult 
reached chester and birmingham in october 1809 and edinburgh's  caledonian 
mercury published semi-regular summary reports on the riots. 6 nevertheless, it was 
in london that the riots and accompanying reportage were most prominent.

the wealth of newspaper reports surrounding the op riots is contrasted sharply 
with the paucity of official accounts. a complete loss of the records compiled at 
bow street means that periodical sources are in most cases our only record of events 
at the magistrates' court during the riots. 7 the present article, therefore, presents 

 5  hannah barker's model of newspapers as commercial entities is useful here, for it helps to explain 

why some newspapers carried varied, opposing, and often wholly contradictory opinions on the op 
war within their pages (even if their editorial lines remained consistent). in sum, the discursive busi ness of newspaper proprietors (that beyond their role as forums for advertisements) was less to pur sue a polemical line and more to appeal to potential readers and purchasers of their newspapers;   
h. barker, newspapers, politics and english society, 1695-1855 (harlow: longman, 2000).
 6  for the former pair, see a. aspinall (ed.) dorothy jordan, mrs. jordan and her family: being the unpublished correspondence of mrs. jordan and the duke of clarence, later william iv  (london: arthur 
barker, 1951), pp. 118-120.
 7  beattie, first english detectives . though a significant loss, given the brevity of comparable records 

(see greg thomas [ed.], summary justice in the city: a selection of cases heard at the guildhall justice 
room, 1752-1781 [london: london record society, 2013]) and that bow street encouraged lengthy 
press reports of its proceedings, the lost case notes may well have amounted to only short summaries. 
in addition to evidence in newspapers, publications on the op riots did appear after the cessation of 
hostilities, notable among which is thomas tegg`s the rise, progress, and termination of the o. p. war, 
in poetic epistles (london: thomas tegg, 1810).

6
findings from a detailed survey of newspapers published in london during autumn 
1809, in particular between mid-october and late-november, weeks characterised 
by bitter struggle. within these, disaggregating the fact, opinion, and perception 
that the newspaper press traded in is fraught with danger. on those occasions when 
newspapers are used as factual sources of events, i have made attempts to corrobo rate stories between contemporary newspapers and with the judgement of subse quent scholarship. however, even if the newspapers failed to capture with precision 
all that happened during the covent garden old price riots, they nevertheless are 
vital to reconstructing opinions and perceptions of the law and the legal system at 
this time. 

\gamma  \delta \theta \lambda  \xi \pi  \sigma \upsilon \phi \psi \omega  \upsilon ff fifl\theta \phi ffiffli\omega \theta \upsilon j

scholars have cautiously explored these sources before and their use to explore 
the old price riots is familiar to historians of english theatre in the long eighteenth 
 century. marc baer's book-length treatment of the conflict,  theatre and disorder in 
late georgian london, argues that the op war is important because rioting londoners  
defeated fashionable elites, because of the substantial if restrained confrontational 
spirit of the middle-class londoners prominent in the campaign, and because the 
conflict offered a prism through which contemporaries could shine light on wider 
social ills.8 jane moody, writing on the falling significance of patent theatres in the 
late eighteenth-century, inserts the op war into a narrative of public rejections of 
legitimate theatre.9 yet, the volume and breadth of coverage allocated to the war by 
london newspapers suggests it deserves greater historiographical attention than it 
has received. peter spence, for example, draws the ops into his history of `romantic   
radicalism,' stresses their loyalism, and ponders how soon such a coordinated, 
 prolonged, and voluminously reported episode was quietly forgotten.10 

 8  m. baer, theatre and disorder in late georgian london (oxford: clarendon press, 1992).
 9  j. moody, illegitimate theatre in london, 1770-1840 (cambridge: cambridge university press, 2000).
 10   p. spence,  the birth of romantic radicalism: war, popular politics, and english radical reformism, 

1800-1815 (aldershot: ashfield, 1996). the conflict does not feature, for example, in either john stevenson, popular disturbances in england, 1700-1870  (london: longman, 1979) or john stevenson, 
popular disturbances in england, 1700-1832 (london: longman, 1992).

 7 

this wider scholarly inattention, spence aside, can be partly explained by the 
fact that the op war was neither an isolated nor unprecedented theatre riot. theatre 
protest was intertwined with long eighteenth-century multi-class metropolitan 
political expression and theatre-going in this period was not the passive, solemn 
experience we take for granted today. in these lively, volatile metropolitan spaces the 
justification for and exclusiveness of new theatre pricing regimes, the resentment 
of theatre monopolies, and the suspicion of impositions along class lines had been 
issues before. as hannah mcpherson writes, `the precariousness of the social contract 
between management and public' was tested over forty years earlier during the 1763 
half-price riots at drury lane and covent garden. 11 earlier still, david garrick was 
forced to withdraw the 1755 drury lane chinese festival in response to riots in and 
outside the theatre. 1743, 1750, 1770, and 1776 saw comparable, violent protests 
at drury lane, throughout which theatregoers debated the value and purpose of 
the patent system. mcpherson concurs with baer that long eighteenth-century theatre audiences were microcosms of society and that the clashes between fashionable 
elites and a multi-class public suspicious of novelty can be fruitfully projected back 
onto wider london and - to a lesser extent - english society in this period.

broadly speaking, i agree with this thesis. i expand on it by bringing much needed 
attention to how agents of the legal system, broadly and loosely defined, were represented and responded to during this prolonged theatre riot, offering another thread 
out of the world of public entertainments and into the more commonly experienced 
world of public justice.

this is achieved by exploring newspaper evidence through considerations of protest, space and policing. the old price riots were one of a panoply of events in the 
long eighteenth-century when britons turned to protest as a means of defending 
customary constructions of liberty, physical and discursive acts that could, as robert 
poole reminds us, elide form and argument. 12 in `what happened to class?' katrina 

 11   mcpherson, `theatrical riots,' 7.
 12   r. poole, `the march to peterloo: politics and festivity in late georgian england,'  past and present  

192.1 (2006). 

8
navickas stresses the potential for reading collective action through the interaction 
between elites and non-elites. 13 as the following makes clear, class interaction - in 
particular a multi-class rejection of perceived elite chicanery - was a crucial feature 
of the op war. moreover, the interactions between the theatre management, their 
patrons, the legal establishment, and the london public tease at two further areas 
navickas seeks to bring to the centre of protest historians' endeavours: those occa sions where collective action was a `vibrant defence of common interests against the 
perceived intrusion of private property and atomizing capitalism' and the extent to 
which policing practices shaped protest.14 

the language of `perceived intrusion[s]' remind us that protests are inherently 
spatial: lines are drawn, spaces are ascribed owners, places are reified. prior to the 
op war, space had been controversially used at sites of public entertainment at the 
whim of the aristocracy. protests at the exclusive character of the 1784 handel commemoration underscore the contemporary non-elite conception that theatres were 
classless public spaces. 15 in  geographies of exclusion , david sibley examines the 
socio-political connection between groups and spaces: `spatial boundaries,' he writes, 
`are in fact moral boundaries.' 16 sibley's discussion of how societies respond to acts 
of border crossing, when one group moves beyond `their' domain - an imaginary 
space with physical boundaries or signifiers of boundaries - and to border erection 
(whether imaginary, symbolic, or physical) chime with the events at covent garden 
theatre in autumn 1809: the removal of the cheapest section of the house, the one 
shilling gallery, to a `pigeon hole' on high; the expansion of private boxes and the 
enclosure from prying eyes of areas only affordable to the elite; and the cessation 
of sales of half-price tickets after the third act, a custom that had hitherto opened 
up the theatre to a multitude - if not the very poorest - of londoners and made 
the space egalitarian in its usage. in short, many ops who entered covent garden 

 13   k. navickas, `what happened to class? new histories of labour and collective action in britain,'  social 

history 36.2 (2011).
 14   navickas, `what happened to class?' 201.

 15   w. weber, `the 1784 handel commemoration as political ritual,' journal of british studies 28 (1989).
 16   d. sibley, geographies of exclusion (london: routledge, 1995), p. 39.

 9 
theatre in late-september 1809 saw the new space as false, as abnormal. as sibley 
writes, `the act of drawing a line in the construction of discrete categories interrupts 
what is naturally continuous. it is by definition an arbitrary act and thus may be 
seen as unjust by those who suffer the consequences of division.' 17 in the suffering 
eyes of the ops, not only were the lines drawn before september 1809 natural and 
lines drawn thereafter arbitrary, but those who had undertaken and supported the 
redrawing - john philip kemble, the theatre management, urban elites, and the legal 
establishment - were outsiders; or, to use sibley's parlance, an `out-group' whose 
boundary crossing and redrawing presented a threat to core values of the covent 
garden crowd. private boxes, for example, were novel, constructed zones of ambiguity whose mechanics - private, hidden, aloof, seemingly beyond reproach - upset 
values the ops saw as central to london theatregoing, to see and to be seen in a 
public theatre, open exchange, and the equality of all under the law.

to understand how policing shaped protest and how spatial politics intersected 
with notions of legal equality, attitudes to enforcement and policing prior to the op 
war must be taken into account. the establishment of the bow street runners and 
court in 1749-50 by henry fielding had a lasting impact on the reputation of metropolitan policing.18 hitherto, thief-takers - individuals who solved crimes and restored 
property in exchange for a reward - had been the visible expression of after-thefact legal enforcement in the capital. if corruption and clandestine activities among 
thief-takers were rife, the pre-trial examinations before bow street magistrates 
of individuals seized evolved, by contrast, into a public spectacle held in an open 
court.19 these examinations made ideal newspaper copy and that copy is, in turn, our 
only substantive record of those examinations. in his analysis of how policing was 
reported in london newspapers between 1747 and 1755, a crucial period in their 
mutual development, richard m. ward argues that the newspapers established a 

 17   sibley, geographies of exclusion, p. 35.
 18   beattie, first english detectives; p. king, crime, justice, and discretion in england, 1740-1820 (oxford: 

oxford university press, 2000); r. m. ward,  print culture, crime and justice in eighteenth-century 
 london (london: bloomsbury, 2014), p. 145. 
 19   ward, print culture, pp. 38-9, 152. 

10
strong  relationship with these new agents of the legal system and, in turn, presented 
a broadly positive image of their conduct, probity, and fairness until at least the end 
of the century.20 in contrast, reports, letters, and notices on the op war published in 
the newspaper press were characterised - on balance - by a sustained negative por trayal of the agents of the legal system. this does not undermine ward's thesis: press 
perceptions and public perceptions were not one and the same and prior to 1809 it 
was not uncommon to find negative portrayals of policing in newspapers and other 
forms of print.21 nevertheless, it is important to observe that published attitudes to 
policing during the op war run contra to the tenor - broadly speaking - of reports 
just a decade or two earlier.

finally, and in light of this observation, any investigation into opinions and perceptions of the op war must also consider the status of metropolitan policing at the 
time of the op war, in particular the bow street officers and patrol, at whose offices 
so many ops appeared in the autumn of 1809. as part of the machinery of criminal 
justice, bow street was an instrument of state power. 22 this machinery was particu larly conspicuous in late-georgian london, as radical reform movements - inspired 
by the french revolution - provoked alarm among the english political establish ment, alarm that manifested itself as efforts to preserve social order. this culminated 
in the 1792 middlesex justices act, which established seven public `police' offices 
across the metropolis. though these were modelled more or less on bow street, bow 
street was not mentioned in the act and remained a separate entity. as the historian 
john beattie argues, in the years after 1792 the home office exploited the flexible 
and informal standing of bow street to transform its function, funding new tasks 
needed to head off the perceived threat of insurrection.23 

 20   ward, print culture, pp. 115, 141, 152-6. 
 21   an argument made in j. m. beattie,  policing and punishment in london, 1660-1750  (oxford: oxford 

university press, 2001).
 22   see joanna innes and john styles, `the crime wave: recent wrtiing on crime and criminal justice in 

eighteenth-century england,' journal of british studies 25 (1986), 380-435.
 23   beattie, first english detectives, pp. 167-205. 

 11 

the bow street foot patrol, distinct in conception from the more investigative 
and national bow street runners, was expanded. the foot patrol took on the role of 
maintaining public order, of keeping the peace in the streets and at public gatherings 
such as fairs and markets. it was these men, commonly - if erroneously - referred 
to in newspapers as `officers,' who patrolled covent garden theatre during the op 
war, arrested those who contravened a state influenced notion of public order, and 
brought those arrested to bow street for examination. moreover, the long-standing 
relationship between bow street and the management of covent garden theatre 
should not be understated. located on each other's doorstep, the theatre was the 
largest place of public entertainments in bow street's area of traditional (if neverformalised) jurisdiction and the organisational relationship between the two entities 
was no doubt deepened by the royal security role bow street officers played after 
1789, namely accompanying the king and royal family to places of public entertain ments, such as the royal patent theatres. more than any other of the new functions 
that bow street undertook on behalf of a jittery home office after 1792, their policing of the op war blended their roles as guardians of national security and guardians 
of public order. the suspicion ops came to hold towards the motives of bow street 
suggest that negative portrayals of the agents of the legal system and these new roles 
and functions of bow street circa 1809 were not unrelated.

it is in the context of these multiple scholarly traditions - of theatre history and 
protest history, of human geography and the history of policing - that this article 
explores where the law was seen to be visible, how it was reported upon, and how 
its actions were responded to during the op war. the article discusses how contem porary londoners were said to have encountered the magistrates, `police officers,' 
justices, and lawyers who together, however informally connected, were agents of 
the legal system, where these agents were seen, and what they did. it moves on to 
examine how the actions of those agents and the legal system they represented 
were reported upon. it concludes with a discussion of how members of the public 
responded to those actions. drawing on contemporary periodicals for opinions on 
and for perceptions of what happened, i argue that the covent garden old price riots 

12
were a significant urban conflict because of the ways that the riots intersected with 
wider late-georgian concerns, with discursive arenas where the liberty of free-born 
englishmen and women were contested and at stake.

\gamma \gamma  \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \upsilon \phi  \pi \psi \lambda  \omega \lambda \theta fffi flffi\sigma \pi \lambda ffl

at the completion of the programme of events planned for 18 september 1809, 
two magistrates stood before the covent garden theatre crowd. the rendition of 
 macbeth offered by john philip kemble's troupe had been drowned out by the whistles, shouts, calls, songs, and stamps of the paying audience. magistrates read and 
nabes were called the short distance from the bow street magistrates' office to read 
the riot act. the crowd did not disperse promptly and, as they had begun, closed 
their performance with stirring renditions of `god save the king' and `rule, britan nia!' as befitted such an occasion, the scene was captured by satirical artist-engravers 
and sold in print shops across london. one design by isaac cruikshank and his son 
george is as evocative as it is erroneous: a number of details - including the bells, 
rattles, banners, and horns wielded by the theatre crowd were not seen until the 
following night.24 these fictions do not preclude the use of cruikshank's design by 
the historian. cruikshank's intention to broadly represent sights common in the pit 
both on and after the opening night highlights the visibility of officers of the law 
during the op conflict. this section explores that visibility, representations of agents 
of the legal system during the op war, the means by which those agents expressed 
themselves, and their opinions on the disturbances at covent garden theatre during 
the autumn of 1809.

after the calamity of the opening night, bow street officers patrolled the corridors 
of covent garden theatre and continued to do so into the new year. 25 at the behest 

 24   i. cruikshank and g. cruikshank,  ij`'^* _i*'*`,i`ss* aeoeo/o/aeoeoeaeo/ oe!"o/#"$%"# &"aeo/ oe!"ae' ('#oe

appearance on this stage as performed at the national theatre covent garden. sepr 18 1809  (1809; 
british museum satires 11418). for the function of reportage in satirical prints published during the 
op war see j. baker, `the op war, libertarian communication and graphic reportage in georgian 
london,' european comic art 4.1 (2011).
 25   old bailey proceedings online (www.oldbaileyonline.org, version 7.0), 21 february 1810, trial of abra ham hart and edward white (t18100221-108).

 13 
of the doorman, james brandon, they were tasked with dealing with disturbances in 
order to keep order. during the op war, the sight of one of these men, or men from 
other `police' offices, was the primary recorded interaction between covent garden 
theatregoers and the legal system. for example, on saturday, 11 november, lewis 
vanduduce was arrested by `mr. bell, the high constable for the holborn division.'26 
the direct identification of the arresting officer here was an exception; rarely were 
they named by newspapers and this partial anonymity had negative consequences.27 
during times of heightened tension, such as in late-october 1809, suspicious ops 
questioned the identity of constables and elided them, by virtue of their actions, with 
the independent and unscrupulous thief-takers thought to have been common in 
the mid-eighteenth century.28 

the second group of legal officials who regularly appeared at the theatre were 
not there to arrest ops, but to develop a rapport with them, and drum up busi ness, by addressing the audience from the pit and galleries on points of law. for 
instance, following an address from kemble on 20 september, an attorney and a 
barrister rose to speak. each sought to clarify the owner-actor's attempts at concili ation from a legal, outwardly impartial, and yet clearly pro-op perspective. 29 once 
the `police,' `constables,' or `officers' from bow street identified a disturbance, they 
would attempt an arrest and, if successful, take their prisoner to bow street. here, at 
the bow street magistrates' court, the theatregoing public interacted with the legal 
system for a third time, on this occasion before both appointed guardians of the law 
and formal agents of the legal system. reports from bow street at the time of the op 
conflict mention the bow street magistrates graham, nabes, and read. arrests from 

 26   the times, 13 november 1809.
 27   the fact that brandon tended to speak for the prosecution at bow street means few other names are 

mentioned with regards to arrest. indeed the ire ops developed against the covent garden doorman 
meant that most testimonies for the defence addressed brandon directly, except in cases where one 
member of the audience arrested another and brought them to bow street. reports do make mention 
of witnesses for the prosecution, though it is rarely clear if they were constables or hired-hands.
 28   morning chronicle, 17 october 1809; the times, 23 october 1809.

 29   the times, 21 september 1809.

14
covent garden theatre dominated their business and forced them, on days of noted 
tumult, to work `till midnight,' `till past twelve o'clock,' and on the fiftieth day since 
the theatre reopened - the op jubilee - `from a little after eight o'clock' until one 
the next morning.30 moreover, whilst it was typical for one magistrate to work the op 
cases each night, on occasions when there were many cases to be heard more than 
one presided over accusations of wrongdoing in the theatre.

from the courthouse, to the gaol, to the hanging tree, scholars of the long 
eighteenth century have a well-developed notion of the potentially fluid bounda ries between public spaces and spaces of state justice, confinement, and power. 31 
during the op war this fluidity was reinforced by the openness with which news papers reported the proceedings at bow street and the correlations made between 
activities in the covent garden theatre pit, boxes, and galleries each night with decisions reached by the magistrates. however, an incident on saturday 25 november 
problematises this contemporary narrative of judicial openness. on this night   
`mr. eagle, a barrister' was brought before graham `charged with assaulting read, 
one of the patrole.' the alleged assault took place when eagle had attempted to enter 
the bow street court, for he presumed that it was a public space. in the reported 
summary of his remarks, graham made it clear that this was not the case. `it was a 
mistaken notion,' graham states, `that that was a public court, as they were not sit ting in judgement, but merely inquiring whether the matters complained of were fit 
to go before a public court or not.'32

some agents of the legal system  appeared aware that a spatially restricted bow 
street could be detrimental to their cause. john stafford, chief clerk of bow street, 
issued public proclamations on the op war, both as notices posted in public places 

 30   the times, 11 october, 13 november, 27 november 1809.
 31   j. m. beattie,  crime and the courts in england, 1660-1800  (oxford: oxford university press, 1986);   

d. hay et. al. (eds),  albion`s fatal tree: crime and society in eighteenth-century england  (london:  
allen lane, 1975); t. hitchcock, r. shoemaker, c. emsley, s. howard, and j. mclaughlin, et al. the old 
bailey proceedings online, 1674-1913 (2012), available at http://www.oldbaileyonline.org, version 7.0 
[last accessed 4 december 2014]; p. linebaugh,  the london hanged: crime and civil society in the 
 eighteenth  century (cambridge: cambridge university press, 1992).
 32   the times, 27 november 1809.

 15 
and in newspapers.33 justice mainwaring sought to address a broad public in presiding comments made during the october westminster quarter sessions. a month later 
the attorney general, sir vicary gibbs, expanded on this line of reasoning during an 
address from the court of king's bench. 34 the public character of the sessions held 
at westminster hall by the lord chief justice were a counterpoint to the ambiguous 
status of bow street. nevertheless, charges of conspiracy against these men, from 
constables to the attorney general, became integral to the op protest. one reason 
for this was the conspicuous absence from the op war of the lord chamberlain, who 
oversaw the patent held by covent garden theatre, and parliamentarians. evidently, 
this troubled the ops and perhaps in consequence one jovial shakespearean placard 
raised in the pit pleaded to a higher authority still: `angels and ministers of grace,' it 
read, `defend us from this imposition.'35

in these varied arenas, agents  of the legal system expressed themselves in many 
ways. in the theatre, they arrested perceived troublemakers on both sides, often for 
assault, and tore down placards affixed to boxes, railings, and balconies. by early 
october 1809, it was commonplace for the possession and use of horns or bells 
within the theatre to provoke an attempt at arrest, as was the distribution of handbills 
among the audience. outside the theatre, they sought to restrict comparable activi ties. james andrews was arrested and brought to bow street by james brandon on 10 
october for having distributed a handbill `in the avenues leading to the theatre.' the 
handbill accused kemble of having offered free admissions to covent garden theatre 
to a group of jewish pugilists led by the noted boxer dan mendoza. 36 exacerbated 
by policing, the spaces that surrounded the theatre soon played host to a fierce dis cursive battle. here, ephemera in support of the ops competed with proclamations 
from bow street `posted about the streets, expressing,' according to  the examiner 
of 15 october, `the determination of the magistrates to prevent the breach of the 

 33   the times, 16 october 1809.
 34   examiner, 29 october 1809; the times, 21 november 1809.
 35   the times, 22 september 1809.
 36   the times, 11 october 1809; the morning chronicle, 11 october 1809; examiner, 15 october 1809.

16
peace by rioting at the theatre.'  in response to these proclamations, ops amended 
their behaviour so as to avoid arrest, and, in response to this change in behaviour, 
officers again amended their grounds for arrest. the consequence was that arrests 
in the pit, the corridors, the gallery, the one-shilling gallery, and the private boxes of 
covent garden theatre continued unabated. as the protest moved into november 
1809, men and women were brought before the bow street magistrates charged 
with having caused or incited disturbance, riot, and tumult for singing `god save the 
king,' using rattles, blowing whistles, gesturing, walking about, sneezing loudly, and 
wearing the words `o.p' or `n.p.b' (no private boxes) in their hats.

when arrested, men and women were brought to bow street, and there the magistrates expressed themselves by demanding bail. bail ranged from #100 to #500, 
plus sureties - normally the same amount paid by two individuals - for the release 
of the accused. if no bail was present or forthcoming, the accused was committed, 
regardless of the gravity of the offence. mary austin, for example, was committed `for 
want to bail' on monday 16 october for little more than use of a rattle. bow street 
magistrates also offered advice to those who came before them. having been the subject of a scuffle in defence of her honour on 14 november, mrs hewetson `appeared,' 
the times  reported the next day, `in the course of the examination [...] a constant 
frequenter of the theatre, and very zealous on the part of the proprietors. as her 
object in visiting it certainly could not be to hear the play, it was suggested that she 
might with more propriety stay at home.' ten days earlier, magistrate graham acquitted john winholt of hissing during the performance and found against his accuser 
george white for rough treatment. nevertheless, graham cautioned winholt not to 
repeat his assertion that he would the following night take pistols to the theatre as a 
means of self-defence, for if he did the court `must be under the necessity of advising 
him to find bail to keep the peace.'37

few attempts at keeping order were planned and when planning did take place 
it tended to be  ad hoc at best. on wednesday 18 november, the  morning chronicle 
reported a speech from a naval officer who had been active in the pit for some days. 

 37   the times, 6 november 1809.

 17 
`what!,' he proclaimed, `are englishmen struggling against injustice to be bullied by 
hired ruffians - to be beaten down by the very dregs and refuse of the twelve tribes.' 
applause rang around the theatre accompanied by a call of `take care of him.' 38 
clearly the ops feared that having made a connection between `hired ruffians' and 
theatrical tyranny in a public venue, that the naval officer had crossed a line. they 
were right, for as they carried the orator from the theatre in triumph to a coffee 
house on cecil-street, they were followed, unbeknown to the naval officer and his 
supporters, by john smith `one of the patrol belonging to the [bow street] office.' 
once the naval officer's supporters had left, smith seized him and brought him to 
bow street. here, after `considerable difficulty,' read and graham discovered he was 
in fact an assistant druggist by the name of samuel dudfield. dudfield was ordered 
to find bail of #200 and two sureties of #100 each.

not all those ordered to find bail at bow street went on to face a grand jury  at 
the westminster quarter sessions. of those that did fewer still had bills of indictment 
found against them. at the 28 october sessions, forty-two op related bills of indict ment were put forward of which only seventeen were found. that twenty-five bills 
were considered not worthy by a westminster jury placed strain on the impartiality 
of bow street's interpretation of public order. the position of the legal establishment 
was that the disturbances at covent-garden theatre were illegal. indeed, in the days 
that lead up to the october sessions, the courts had begun to attach the notion of 
conspiracy to their complaints against ops. 39 these actions recall national security 
alarms from the 1790s. reports from the sessions record justice mainwaring's insistence that the jury were to consider the bills of indictment with respect to points of 
law rather than any sense of ops possessing a right to protest or to resist oppression.40 
in spite of the jury not finding in most cases in favour of mainwaring, arrests and 
charges against ops continued, and the offences for which ops were charged indicate 
a belief that op was a dangerous and threatening conspiracy. in november 1809,   

 38   the times, 19 november 1809.
 39   the times, 26 october 1809.
 40   examiner, 29 october 1809.

18
a number of theatregoers were arrested for nothing more than having worn the let ters `o.p.' in their hats. others were brought to bow street for offences as trivial as 
having ran, elevated placards, or used indecent language.41

the actions and expressions of men such as mainwaring overwhelmingly sug gest that they saw op as both a threat to public order and a conspiracy. 42 once the 
attorney general sir vicary gibbs entered the affair from the court of king's bench 
on 20 november, the latter position was entrenched. gibbs agreed with affidavits 
that justified the rise in admission prices, allegations of a conspiracy against coventgarden theatre, suggestions that wearing the letters `o.p.' and raising placards in the 
theatre were riotous conduct, and that the barrister henry clifford was their ring leader. he used the strongest possible hyperbole in order to situate the disturbances 
within the history of protest in london: the op disturbances were, he argued, `the 
greatest riots that had every disgraced the metropolis.' 43 greater even it seems than 
the infamous and calamitous gordon riots.44

\gamma \gamma \gamma  \sigma \delta \theta \lambda  \xi \pi \upsilon \phi \psi \lambda  \upsilon \omega fffi fl\phi ffi\theta fi \omega ff\psi \lambda flffl\lambda ffl \omega i\pi flffifffi fi\theta \lambda  j\pi fflff` '

^\lambda *\pi _fi\phi flffi fi\theta \lambda  *\lambda ffi\omega \upsilon  ,ssfffi\lambda i

the existence of physical and discursive interactions between agents of the legal system and the ops, and the details of those interactions, were widely reported. editorials went further and described the consequences of legal activities in covent-garden 
theatre, bow street, and the london courts. they included reports of proclamations, 
arrests, and trials, and reveal a concern for three issues: the definition of a crime, 

 41   the legal system did on many occasions work to the advantage of the ops. a jewish pugilist, presumed 

to have been hired by the covent garden theatre management, was prosecuted at bow street on 
10 november (the times, 11 november 1809). john winholt, an op who visited the magistrates' office 
on over four occasions in autumn 1809, had on 22 november a hat returned to him that had been 
stolen whilst he protested at covent garden theatre (the times, 23 november 1809).
 42   henry hoskins, who appeared at the old bailey on 1 november 1809 charged with highway robbery, 

went so far as to use his reluctance to accompany his accuser to covent garden theatre `because 
his intention was to kick up a row in the house' as evidence of his good character. it is tempting, if 
unsubstantiated, to suggest that given the magistracy's distate for the ops that this played a part in 
his acquittal. old bailey proceedings online, 1 november 1809, trial of henry hoskins (t18091101-45).
 43   the times, 21 november 1809.

 44   i. haywood and j. reed (eds.),  the gordon riots: politics, culture and insurrection in late eighteenthcentury britain (cambridge: cambridge university press, 2012).

 19 
the definition of a criminal, and inconsistencies in legal application. this section 
focuses on the latter concern, by far the most common complaint during the autumn 
1809 phase of the old price riots.

when, on the first night of the op war, the bow street magistrates read the riot 
act, this neither alarmed nor dispersed the audience, and because the situation was 
a legal anomaly, the reading was never repeated. the audience had, after all, paid to 
assemble and the audience were assembled in a space which held a patent licence to 
hold public entertainments. what was,  the times  asked on 21 september 1809, the 
legality of bringing those who had expressed `marks of disapprobation at a public 
theatre' before a magistrate? as a consequence, reports on legal proceedings for the 
first few nights indicate a cautious and conservative response from agents of the legal 
system; property crimes, a mainstay of long eighteenth-century crime and justice, 
formed the bulk of bow street cases reported on 19 september.45 the editorial reflections on these arrests were similarly cautious, concerned with class politics as much 
as the veracity of crimes for which theatregoers were being accused. `police officers,' 
the times  commented, were `very awkwardly situated, many of the persons whom 
they have taken into custody being men of respectability.'46 given these tensions, hostility toward the actions of bow street was rare at this time - the  morning chronicle, 
though supportive of the protesters, baulked at censoring officers;  the times, fearful 
of an escalation of violence,  called for the protesters to boycott the theatre, and the 
morning post, as it would throughout the conflict, cheered on the management, the 
magistrates, and the heavy hand of the law.

matters began to change in early-october 1809 as the theatre management, who 
had up until this time appealed to the legal establishment to keep order, began to 
take the law into their own hands in an attempt to quell the protests.  the times 

 45   a single arrest from the opening night was tried at the old bailey. william dyer was brought to the 

court accused of stealing a handkerchief at the door to the covent garden theatre pit. dyer was 
arrested by his accuser john goodyear. he was found guilty and sentenced to a shilling fine and 
imprisonment for one year. old bailey proceedings online, 20 september 1809, trial of william eakins 
dyer (18090920-69).
 46   the times, 21 september 1809.

20
noted on 5 october that on the previous night `it was with pain we observed' hired 
hands acting for the management. the paper reiterated its resignation five days 
later and conflated the officers of bow street with a panoply of trouble-makers: the 
pit, they commented, `appeared a second babel' with `jews, turks, hibernians, bowstreet officers, pugilists, pickpockets, all jumbled together.' 47 it is notable that the 
ops are not mention as part of this group. the next day, whilst the times was batting 
away accusations from theatregoers that it sided with the management, the morning 
chronicle made first mention of a complaint that would become a feature of report ing on the conflict: the inconsistency of arrest and the apparent tendency of bow 
street to arrest only the opponents of the theatre management.48

by mid-october, the management were accused of suppressing a multi-class and 
inter-gender protest by the unethical employment of `the vilest miscreants known in 
the metropolis to trample on its peaceable inhabitants.'49 the metropolitan newspapers were highly sensitive to any perceived complicity on the part of the legal system. 
leigh hunt's  the examiner, a reform inclined london weekly, noted on 15 october 
that:

a proclamation from bow-street has been posted about the streets, expressing the determination of the magistrates to prevent the breach of the peace 
by rioting at the theatre. - they should, however, have commenced by 
ordering into custody that ferocious set described above, who not only have 
broken the peace, but who went to the theatre for that express purpose.

if hunt was concerned that the law had targeted the wrong side, comparison of 
reports from the theatre and from bow street suggest the legal system had certainly 
targeted one side. the morning chronicle described the atmosphere in covent garden 
theatre on 13 october as boisterously contemptuous towards the proprietors' means 

 47   the times, 10 october 1809.
 48   morning chronicle, 11 october 1809.
 49   morning chronicle, 13 october 1809.

 21 
of intimidation,' that is, their use of hired jewish pugilists.50 the chronicle claimed to 
have seen more placards than on any night since the beginning of the conflict, many  
of which were explicitly anti-semitic (`the covent-garden synagogue - mendoza 
the grand rabbi'; `bish, the detector of fraud v mendoza, the leader of hired 
pugilists'; `shall britons be subdued by the wandering tribe of jerusalem?'). a report 
in the times  on 14 october 1809 described in detail the violent turn the evening 
took:

theatrical criticism is now converted into the record of gladiatorial brutality 
and bow-street conviction [...] no sooner was the war-whoop sounded, than 
the most ferocious, and apparently predetermined, contests took place in 
every part of the house, and particularly in the boxes. neither the remon strances of the peaceable, not the distress of the female part of the audience, 
had the least influence on the conduct of the combatants.

readers of this report might well have concluded that on 13 october offences took 
place on both sides; and  the times' ambiguous use of `combatants' might well indi cate editorial caution. yet, a clearly one-sided picture emerged in the subsequent 
reports on the arrests and convictions of theatregoers who protested and resisted 
jewish pugilists that night. thomas higham, a servant, was unsuccessfully charged 
by george jones, one of the box-keepers at covent-garden theatre, for having waved 
his hat and exhibited papers marked `jew or gentile' and `covent-garden synagogue' 
from the two-shilling gallery. the seventeen-year-old robert winduld was charged 
with having waved in the pit a sign that read `covent-garden rabbi.' morris thomas, 
`a gentleman of respectability,' was charged (and acquitted) with having breached 
the peace by `hooting, hissing, and kicking.'51 john soane of lincoln's inn fields was 
convicted of having shouted and banged his fists.52

 50   morning chronicle, 14 october 1809.
 51   the times, 16 october 1809; morning chronicle, 16 october 1809.
 52   this john soane is not to be confused with the famous architect john soane.

22
there are three plausible reasons for this discrepancy in reports on activities 
in and outside covent garden theatre on 13 october: either ops were targeted for 
arrest;  the times,  the  morning chronicle ,  et al.   selectively reported arrests of ops; 
or these papers' initial reports of the tumult falsely imagined (for reasons of pro priety, caution, inattention, or otherwise) a scene of conflict where in fact it was 
one of op-led riot. all these interpretations are plausible, yet for our purposes it is 
important to note that the metropolitan newspapers (the  morning post  excepted) 
presented in their editorial judgements a narrative of injustice. when morris thomas 
was discharged, the times quoted magistrate graham as having stated that `he saw 
no ground for charging him with any unlawful expression of his sentiments in the 
theatre.'53 the morning chronicle report of the same day went further and chose to 
include in its editorial an attack on thomas' treatment that did not directly pertain 
to the case at hand:

submitted to the consideration of the magistrates the injustice and arbitrary 
interposition of the police officers, to prevent the exercise of fair opinion 
of the audience, respective the performances in the theatre, as a conduct 
which was completely subversive of the rights of englishmen in a british 
theatre. he did not deny that he had hissed and hooted at the performance, 
on the contrary, he avowed that he did so, from a principal of unbiased 
judgement. as, however, the charge was brought forward, he must insist in 
meeting it in the open day. he had been dragged ignominiously out of the 
theatre, in a manner so rudely, that the most outrageous conduct on his part 
would not have warranted.54

four days later, the morning chronicle began a report of an arrest in the one-shilling 
gallery with sarcasm: `the police,' they wrote, `last night ascended amongst the gods.' 
having established a narrative of selective arrest, the op-supportive newspapers not 
only reported instances where legal processes were not applied universally but also 

 53   the times, 16 october 1809.
 54   morning chronicle, 16 october 1809.

 23 
used suggestive and impartial language to do so. the bow street magistrates,  the 
examiner commented on 22 october, `appear as partisans rather than judges.' on 
29 october, the examiner made a pointed in-versus-out-group juxtaposition between 
the character of a man accused of tumult, singing, and having worn op insignia and 
the character of an informant that bow street officers used in their attempts to convict him. mr t. russell, the accused, was described as the `nephew to a most respect able tradesman in westminster.' abraham mark braham, the witness of his supposed 
crimes, was described as `a jew broker of furniture and salesman.' a month later, and 
with ops having been ordered to find bail for booing, dancing, singing, using rat tles, coughing, sneezing, and making speeches, the times wryly noted that `the presence of the party of old prices was only occasionally evinced by a trifling hiss; which 
now seems to be deemed the only  legal methods of expressing disapprobation.' 55 
the emphases here are indicative of how  the times  had repositioned itself since 
18 september, for they suggest an editorial belief that something was seriously amiss 
with the `legal' apparatus if `a trifling hiss' was the only disapproving action a theatregoer could make in order to avoid arrest.

the morning post saw matters rather differently. the paper was, baer argues, `slavishly tory' and rarely took against the covent garden theatre management. 56 i can 
find little at fault with this position. reports on the op war published in the morning 
post portray ops arrested by the police as irritating members of a `self-denominated 
"public"' disturbing the peace, harmony, and attention of the true public. 57 ops 
and theatregoers alike were well aware of this characterisation of the protesters 
as `rebels.' indeed, one of the many placards they erected on the subject read `the 
times and post are bought and sold, by kemble's pride and kemble's gold.' 58 the 
times rejected this accusation both directly and in their editorial position over the 
coming months. the morning post, on the other hand, cared little and continued to 

 55   reports suggest that in late-november 1809 numerous arrests for making noise were made without 

clearly verifying the identity of the offender; see for example the times, 23 november 1809.
 56   baer, theatre and disorder, 113.

 57   morning post, 1 december 1809.
 58   the times, 11 october 1809.

24
vigorously defend the actions of the management. when james thomas, a man they 
had described as having possessed a `dirty appearance,' was brought before the bow 
street magistrates on 2 december, the  morning post  eagerly presented his sarcasm 
and insolence as evidence of the ops' lack of propriety, gentility, and good sense. but 
this exchange also reveals a great deal about how the london public responded to 
the actions of agents of the legal system during the autumn of 1809. it is to james 
thomas, and the narrative the morning post chose to mock, that we now turn.

\gamma \delta  \sigma \gamma  \theta \lambda \xi \pi  \xi \upsilon \phi \psi  \theta \phi  \omega fffififl \omega fiffiff\xi  ffiffl \theta ij ` 'i\xi ^fiffl\xi i\xi   

\pi fi \pi *i _i*\upsilon ff ,\phi \xi \pi i\theta 

james thomas was seized on friday 1 december. the press disputed the extent of   
the disturbance he had partaken in.  the times  thought the uproar little more than 
that which `generally accompanies a piece that is not popular.'59 the morning chronicle  reported that much of the last two acts of  a cure for the heart ache  and  the 
jubilee, the afterpiece, were `overwhelmed by the noise that prevailed in the house.'60 
the morning post  considered the noise mere interruptions that `were neither loud 
nor long.'61 all agreed, however, that a man, identified by the times and morning post 
as james thomas, was taken to bow street by james brandon for, variously, having 
`ventured to display' the initials o.p. in his hat ( morning chronicle), `brandishing a 
stick over his head in a threatening manner, as if bidding defiance to the authority 
and powers of the officers' ( the times), and having been the first to attempt to dis turb the entertainments (morning post). by the time of his arrival at bow street, the 
magistrates had retired for the evening. thomas spent the night in the watch-house  
and was not examined until the following morning. on monday 4 december the 
morning post featured a lengthy report on thomas' examination. his exchange with 
justice graham was recorded as follows:

the clerk to the prisoner - "what is your name?" 
prisoner - "james thomas" 

 59   the times, 2 december 1809.
 60   morning chronicle, 2 december 1809.
 61   morning post, 2 december 1809.

 25 
clerk - "what are you?" 
prisoner - "that is no matter" 
mr graham, the sitting magistrate, to prisoner - "do you not consider yourself in  
  the pit of covent-garden theatre?" 
prisoner - "i do not" 
clerk - "where do you live?" 
prisoner - "here." 
clerk - "where do you reside?" 
prisoner - "i did live in argyle-street." 
graham - "do not tell us where you did reside, but where your residence is now." 
prisoner - "i do not think it a fair question, therefore shall not answer." 
clerk - "what are you?" 
prisoner - "a man!" 
clerk - "you are a very rude man." 
graham - "you are much mistaken, if you think this kind of rude behaviour can do  
  you any good" 
prisoner - "i am not rude."

together with an accompanying report that included thomas' probing cross- 
examination of his accuser, james brandon, this exchange played into the theatrical 
reporting of the riots often seen in the  morning post.62 yet it appeared on the same 
day in near identical form in both the times and, with the exception of the exchange 
above (replaced with `he gave his name as "james thomas," but refused to state his 
residence'), the  morning chronicle; this in spite of the three papers disagreeing on 
why and in what context thomas was arrested.

whether it was true or not, this was the story that entered the public domain. 
removed from the pro-management master narrative the  morning post  put forth, 
thomas' defiant appearance at bow street takes on a witty, daring, and intelligent 
quality that encapsulates many of the frustrations evident in public responses to 

 62   baer, theatre and disorder, pp. 113-114.

26
the activities of constables, magistrates, and justices during the op war. indeed, the 
letters that were written to newspapers, the speeches that were given in the theatre, 
the placards that were hoisted, the mock playbills that were circulated, and the insignia that were proudly displayed collectively indicate a profound frustration with the 
legal establishment. with these expressions of frustration increasingly suppressed, 
the metropolitan newspapers were, by the time of thomas' arrest, a vital platform 
through which the ops could respond to the legal system and sustain and legitimise 
their cause. this final section explores responses to the legal system expressed inside 
covent garden theatre, at sites of justice, and in the public press.

at the beginning of the op conflict, some two and half months prior to james 
thomas' verbal altercation with justice graham, most acts of op protest took place 
within covent garden theatre. speeches were one method by which ops articu lated their complaints. on the second night of the op war, a gentleman sat in one 
of kemble's new and controversial private boxes rose to address a bow street officer. 
`you should not be too busy,' began  the times  report of his speech published 21 
september 1809:

you are certainly a useful man in your situation, but in this instance you 
appear to me to be out of your latitude. your business is to prevent public 
depredations; but at present, it appears to me, you have changed your usual 
plan, and that you are now assisting robbers, and taking the robbed into 
custody.

two days later kemble addressed the audience. they were palpably loyal to king 
and country and had earlier that night sung god save the king and hoisted  placards 
that read `support king george, resist king kemble.' but loyalism should not be   
confused with deference. the ops were suspicious of legal authority and evidently 
unhappy with the appointment - by the management - of the governor of the bank 
of england to head a committee tasked with the inspection of covent garden thea tre's finances. the uproar `became more violent that ever' when kemble, in an effort 
to demonstrate (as he put it) `how much we wish for impartial justice,' named the 

 27 
attorney general as a member of committee. 63 the establishment and the crowd 
were at odds.

during the second week of october 1809, the noted lottery proprietor thomas 
bish used the newspaper press to articulate his accusation that the theatre manage ment were paying jewish boxers to suppress the op war.64 after offences as trivial as 
mock sneezing and nose blowing led to court arrest within the theatre, ops turned 
to letter writing in protest. john tackle complained of having received beatings from 
jewish men and having been a victim of false arrest in a letter published by both 
the times  and the morning chronicle  on 12 october. three days later  the examiner  
summarised his tale.

it is notable that acts of protest began to shift to newspaper publication as 
jewish pugilists became more prominent as enforcers of the will of the covent 
garden theatre management. these boxers first entered the theatre on 6 october 
and remained active until 14 october. 65 such was the ferocity of this period that 
some theatregoers appeared to yearn for the return of bow street authority. one   
letter writer remarked at:

the absurdity of an attempt to restore the tranquillity of the theatre, by 
confiding the preservation of it not to the established police, but a class of 
persons who notoriously subsist by a violation of the laws of their country.66

if bow street were trusted by some to uphold the basic tenets of the law, they were 
criticised by others for their favour towards the tactics of the management. discrep ancies in bail conditions was one complaint. in a letter to the morning chronicle that 

 63   the times, 23 september 1809.
 64   morning chronicle, 12 october 1809; in the same letter bish admitted to having asked his employee 

james andrews, who we have seen, to distribute handbills containing the same accusations. this is 
one of a number of letters by bish that were published in the metropolitan press.
 65   for a detailed account of this phase of the riots, a phase characterised in the contemporary mind by 

the presence of jewish pugilists in covent garden theatre, see j. baker, `jewishness and the covent 
garden op war: satirical perceptions of john philip kemble,'  nineteenth-century theatre and film  
40.1 (2013). 
 66   the times, 12 october 1809.

28
responded to activities during the jewish phase of the riots, `fair justice' wrote on 
11 october that:

as a lover of impartial justice, i should be glad to know why the magistrates 
of bow-street demand bail to the amount of 800l., that is 400l. the offender, 
and 400l. his sureties, of such persons as are accused of opposing the 
proprietors' demands, and accepting from the author of the blind boy, 
(accused of riotous conduct in support of the managers), 40l. i.e. himself 20l. 
and mr. brandon (the oathtaking box-keeper) 20l.67

days later, a letter from `a constant reader' published in the  morning chronicle 
criticised both the magistrates and officers from bow street - the latter for having 
allowed `a notorious prize-fighter' to `publicly and repeatedly' challenge `the whole 
house to fight' in their presence, the former for not having taken `cognizance of this 
matter.'68

during this phase of the riots, arrests in the theatre became a common topic for 
newspaper correspondents. `i made application to several constables in the theatre, 
not one would return to the pit with me to secure the offenders,' read a letter pub lished in  the examiner  on 15 october 1809, `is it not therefore evident, sir,' one 
`humanitas' continued, `that these ruffians must have been hired?' a day later  the 
times carried a letter from a member of the public whose speech had the previously 
evening caught the attention of the bow street officers in attendance. thwarted in 
their attempts to arrest him `the officers of the justice seized a gentleman,' the author 
wrote with disgust, `who took no part whatever in the affair.' the pseudonymous `a 
friend to justice' had been, until he witnessed this seemingly unwarranted arrest, 
offering some words in support of the management.

with the departure of the jewish pugilists, the violence subsided. yet bow street 
officers continued their arrests. many ops saw these arrests as indiscriminate and 
situated their experience in relation to ancient precedent. j. lorraine wrote on 19 

 67   morning chronicle, 13 october 1809.
 68   morning chronicle, 16 october 1809.

 29 
october that `i want to know on what grounds the magistrate commits persons, who 
use only the modes of expressing disapprobation, which have been practised since 
the very first invention of the drama by the greeks.' one individual, who lorraine 
witnessed the arrest of, was the aforementioned mary austin. `sir,' he continued, 
`i must say, my blood boils in me, as a briton, at the very idea of a young woman's 
being sent to prison, for only springing a child's rattle in the one-shilling gallery of 
covent-garden playhouse.'69 

mary austin had been arrested on monday 16 october `charged with springing a 
small rattle in the one-shilling gallery, and exciting disturbance on the part of those 
around, by her pernicious example.' these grounds contrasted with reports of her 
deposition, in which she claimed to have been handed the rattle, knew not that it 
might cause harm, and respectfully stated, according to the times on 21 october, that 
`the magistrates were at liberty to do what their wisdom might direct.' committed for 
want of bail by magistrate read, the treatment of this young servant clearly aggra vated the op community.

whether or not her testimony and the subsequent reporting of it were true, 
for a brief period mary austin became a martyr. her status is recorded in the list of 
names against funds pledged to a subscription `for the assistance of persons con sidered unjustly prosecuted by the proprietors and managers of covent 
garden theatre.' the idea of a subscription list in support of less wealthy ops 
was first floated in the public press (the times at first) by the anonymous `publicola' 
on 21 october, the day after the appearance of lorraine's letter. the following week, 
the same paper carried an advertisement that announced the establishment of the 
list, the locations where money could be left, and an initial subscription of #58 18s. 
following the lead set by publicola, wealthy supporters of the ops pledged anon ymously as `an enemy to hired ruffians,' `f.h.,' and `box keeper's oath.' the fund 
quickly mushroomed: #79 9s. 6d. was pledged by 30 october, #152 11s. 7d. by 1 
november, #184 18s. 1d. by 3 november, #248 13s. 7d. by 6 november, and #339 9s. 
7d. by 13 november. it crossed the #400 mark on 23 november. as the subscription 

 69   the times, 20 october 1809.

30
grew, so too blossomed the wit, topicality, and sense of drama of the names used to 
pledge funds: `the key to the private boxes' on 30 october, `a christian recovering 
from the wrath of a jew' on 1 november, `a peep through the pigeon-holes' and `an 
enemy to partial justice - read this' (a pun on magistrate read) on 3 november, 
`query: are private boxes allowed by the patent' on 4 november and so on. it is here 
that austin appeared, once on 30 october in a pledge from `mary austin's rattle' 
and again on 1 november in a pledge from `the sale of a rattle.' her arrest then 
was a symbol of a line having been crossed, of an affront to the ancient privileges of 
theatregoers.

the funds secured and volume of subscriptions collected suggest the list was 
some success. it was organised by committee, and james powell of grove place, 
camden town - a sometime complainant over the appearance of jewish boxers in 
the theatre - was its secretary. powell was a passionate advocate of the op cause and 
on 8 march 1810, long after the dispute had ended, he sent a public notice to the 
metropolitan press that stated:

all persons having any claim upon the above fund for legal expences 
incurred in regard to their defence, and who have not yet sent in their 
claims, are requested to deliver the same on or before the 25th of this present 
month, to mr. william west, attorney, no. 14, new boswell-court, lincoln's 
inn, otherwise they will lose the benefit of the said fund, as the accounts 
will be at that time closed.70

william west added further legal expertise to the op committee, much needed given 
the propensity for bow street to seek arrest. thomas tegg, a bookseller, printer, sta tioner and print seller based on cheapside was another prominent committee member. tegg's shop was one of the premises used to accept subscription list payments, 

 70   o. p. riots. exhibitions. - panoramas. - peace jubilee and sundries. 1809-1814. 1809-1814. ms radical politics and the working man in england: part two: sets 47-49, 51-53, 55-63, and 65-72 set 59; 
vol 2. british library, 30. nineteenth century collections online. web. 14 oct. 2014. http://tinyurl.
galegroup.com/tinyurl/ktan6 

 31 
and his expertise in advertising and publishing was valuable to the op cause. ever the 
opportunist, tegg exploited the conflict for profit by publishing many satirical prints 
and, in the aftermath, a book reflecting on events of autumn 1809.71

the subscription list, the experience in public arenas of its committee, and 
the way the list was used by ops to communicate ideas, messages, grievances, and 
humour offer an instructive example of how ops and their supporters responded to 
the actions of the legal system by moving a significant element of the conflict out side of covent garden theatre. this means of protest was a direct response to how 
ops were policed as threats to public order and security and it became a vital and 
flexible discursive forum. a letter from a lover of justice was published in  the 
times on 23 october that stated triumphantly:

after the despicable means that have been resorted to by the managers 
of covent-garden theatre to support the ungracious and unseasonable 
demands on the public, i should not wonder if similar attempts have been 
made to stifle the liberty of the press. that, however, in spite of all their 
efforts, will, i trust, remain open and pure. this is the only resource left for 
poor john bull. it may be called the bugle-horn of his grievances - a bugle, 
that all the jews, prize-fighters, and thief-takers cannot silence.

here, once more, guardianship of the legal system was conflated with suppression, 
thief-takers with prize-fighters. the injustices inflicted were debated outside the theatre and beyond into late-november, and the press would remain a vital outlet for 
the op cause. a letter from `an englishman' published in the times 20 november 
1809 read:

i am sorry to perceive, sir, that  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  are still sent into the theatre; and 
i find that now they do not hesitate to knock down all before them. it is 
notorious that orders are issued every morning to various persons, who, in 

 71   tegg, the o. p. war. for his style of business see j. barnes and p. barnes, `reassessing the reputation of 

thomas tegg, london publisher, 1776-1846,' book history 3 (2000).

32
the evening, are collected in a body, and introduced into the theatre with 
directions "not to be very nice" with such as dare to express their disapprobation to the conduct of the managers. i am far from being one who would 
encourage or assist the least disturbance in a theatre, or any other place; but 
i cannot help thinking that the conduct of some persons, from the time of 
opening the theatre, up to this moment, has been such as the public at large 
can never sanction or approve.

ops, theatregoers, and those - like this letter writer - merely sympathetic to their 
cause discussed in newspapers not only the op war itself, but also how the agents 
of the legal system had acted in response to the protests at covent garden theatre 
during the autumn of 1809. although removed from the original place of conflict, 
their rebuke and dismay in this arena was as palpable as the physical manifestations 
played out inside covent garden theatre.

------
we, of course, must keep in mind that the  examiner, morning chronicle , and times 
needed little motivation to publish letters that supported press freedoms, that 
preached non-violence, and that showed public appetite for the op cause. these 
newspapers were partial witnesses to the op war. yet it is notable that even these 
partial witnesses published reports and letters that highlighted public sensitivity 
towards to press partiality, a sensitivity born out of the value ops ascribed to the 
press as a forum for debate. proprietors of the morning chronicle no doubt delighted 
in publishing on 12 october details of placards raised in covent garden theatre the 
previous night that had read `no wonder the post condemns john bull's placards, 
when it lies, thick and thin, in support of jew blackguards.' but this reporting of 
public sensitivity to press bias worked both ways. we have already observed that the 
times brought claims that it was in favour of the management, claims it disputed, to 
the attention of its own readers. though it did so in this case to dismiss those claims, 
on 3 november the same paper published in full a notice on the op subscription 
that included funds left under the pseudonym `camelion-like, the times their optics 

 33 
threw on kemble's gold, and instant changed their hue.' no editorial claims to the 
contrary accompanied the notice.

censoring these lines would have been futile. public feeling had reached a head 
the previous evening. early that day, the grand jury found only those indictments 
against ops that involved damage to property and to the theatre: `all the bills for 
making a noise, of whatever nature, were thrown out.' 72 emboldened by both this 
legal victory and the continued outcry against the coercive tactics employed by both 
the covent garden theatre management and bow street, op resistance and disor der within covent garden theatre returned to levels not seen since early-october. 
at half-price, a quiet house was flooded with ops who wore insignia in their hats, 
carried fresh placards, and in many cases began mock fights and to run along the 
benches in the pit. `not a word of the last two acts of  the grecian daughter , or of 
any part of  the turnpike gate , was heard' reported the  morning chronicle.73 at the 
end of their performance, the ops left `huzzaing' in `procession two and two.' they 
passed through bow street and onto the strand where the times reported `they have 
three loud cheers at the chronicle office, and three ditto groans at the  morning post 
office.'74 the next night at covent garden theatre the sentiment endured and the 
ops delighted in `groaning for those newspapers which are inimical to  their objects, 
and cheering those which favour them.'75

as the agents of the legal system (and their various hired hands) intensified their 
efforts to police covent garden theatre and to establish the transgressive agenda of 
the theatre's management, newspapers became more than a venue for reports on 
the covent garden old price riots. they became a space - alongside covent garden 
theatre, bow street, and the courts - where the law and its agents were made visible, 
debated, and judged. the reports on the legal system and responses to their actions 
in the form of the letters and notices that these newspapers carried do not constitute 
a complete, dispassionate, or undistorted record of the conflict. how distorted this 

 72   morning chronicle, 3 november 1809.
 73   ibid.
 74   the times, 3 november 1809.
 75   the times, 4 november 1809.

34
coverage was is outside of the purview of this study. nevertheless, it is worth not ing that the fragments of the judicial records that survive aid us little in this regard. 
they tell us that, for example, richard raper was committed to bridewell `on oath 
of james brandon with making a riot and disturbance in covent garden theatre.' 76 
they suggest that brandon - the covent garden theatre doorman - took an active 
role pursuing cases from bow street to the westminster quarter sessions on behalf 
of his employer, including those of james black, thomas scott, and the aforemen tioned samuel dudfield. 77 they also indicate that whilst ops accounted for a surge 
in the numbers of prisoners delivered to the westminster quarter sessions for riot 
and disorder in october 1809, riot and disorder was already and would remain a 
significant category of offence (numerically behind only assault and theft) for which 
prisoners were delivered to both the middlesex and westminster quarter session 
throughout 1809.78 in short, although revealing in terms of the functioning of jus tice, the surviving judicial record does not help us explore perceptions of the law and 
of how agents of the law responded to events at covent garden theatre during the 
height of the old price riots.

the strength, therefore, of the periodical record, dispassionate or otherwise, is 
that it enables us to grapple with the fragility of the social contract between the legal 
system and theatregoing londoners. as the relationship worsened between own ers and patrons, between guardians and subjects, it would become clear that more 
than the grievances of the ops were at stake. on 4 november 1809 the  morning 
chronicle published a letter from a self-styled `moderator.' `in the name of british 
freedom,' she wrote:

are we to have bow-street officers, bum-bailiffs, and other 
catchpoles presiding at elections, seizing the inhabitants 

 76   london metropolitan archives, wj/sp/1809.
 77   london metropolitan archives, wj/sb/b/0597.
 78   sessions rolls for the westerminster and middlesex session of the peace can be fruitfully sampled to 

gain a sense of the types of offence brought to these legislative arenas. london metropolitan archives, 
(middlesex) mj/sr/3798, 3800, 3803, 3805, 3807, 3810; (westminster) mj/sr/3797, 3802, 3809, 3812.

 35 

of westminster, and dragging them to the office of the 
magistrates, for wearing cockade, or surrounding with the 
usual cries at the hustings in covent-garden? what, sir, are to be 
the limits of the doctrines advanced upon this subject, and to which do they 
not obviously and necessarily tend?

in contrast to the letter that opened this article, a letter published on 18 october 
and specific to the op war, moderator addressed the very nature of liberty and the 
freedoms enjoyed by free-born englishmen. taking the op war as a microcosm for 
wider social, political, and cultural concerns, 79 she used the letter to single out the 
law, the agents of the legal system, and establishment co-option of both in the name 
of public order and national security as the biggest threats to `british freedom.' her 
letter is perhaps somewhat hyperbolic but, together with the reports on the legal 
system and the public responses to their actions that this article has discussed, it 
underscores the contemporary perception among a literate, theatregoing, but nev ertheless multi-class group of londoners that the impartiality of justice had been 
eroded and that this erosion was to the disadvantage of the many britons and to the 
benefit of the fashionable elites; that common interests had been sacrificed to the 
advantage of the interests of the few.

the op war ostensibly addressed the price of public entertainment, the nature 
and arrangement of public spaces, and the forced imposition of novelty. yet, as 
the protest diversified, as policing and justice was perceived as ever more partial, 
and as affronts to freedoms escalated, the covent garden old price riots became 
a peculiar urban conflict that intersected with wider late-georgian concerns, with 
discursive arenas where british liberty and the freedom of her subjects were at stake. 
taken together, the fact that law, policing, and justice were prominent among these 

 79   moderator was not alone in seeing the op war as a microcosm of wider concerns. the whig mp 

william windham wrote in a letter to his private secretary thomas amyot in 18 december 1809 that 
`i am the more alive, i suppose, to this defeat of the managers, because i see it as a rehearsal of what 
is meant for higher performance; the managers being the government; the new prices the taxes [...] 
and the o.p.s exactly the same description of persons as at present; l. s. benjamin (ed.), the windham 
papers, 2 vols. (london: herbert jenkins, 1913), ii, pp. 366.

2
main text
as i watched a subtitled version of  nosferatu: phantom der nacht  (werner herzog, 
1979) on youtube recently (figure 1), my attention was drawn away from the film itself 
and towards the translation on several occasions. once, as the lead character bruno  
is talking to his wife before he leaves to visit count dracula, the subtitling disap peared as he spoke; it vanished mid-sentence, and did not reappear until the next 
scene. left without translation, it felt like i missed out on several sentences in this 
important scene. regardless of how i reacted to this error--irritation, impatience, or 
indifference--something is missing from the film; its representational transparency 
breaks down and is revealed as a construction. what does it mean for viewers when 
engagement with the film and its dialogue founders in such a fashion? a second 
time i was drawn towards the translation was when the innkeeper accosts bruno as 
he rests on his journey. in this scene, the subtitling seems to interact with the film 
dialogue in a way that exceeds its role as translation. dialogue in this tense scene is 
sparse, and there are long pauses between speech. i waited in anticipation for the 
next line of dialogue and for the next subtitle. my expectation added to the suspense 

figure 1:  a fansubbed version of  nosferatu: phantom der nacht  (werner herzog, 

1979) on youtube [no longer available].

 3 
of the scene. it almost seemed intentional, as if it were an aesthetic effect. here, 
i anticipated something as a viewer. what does it say about translation and subtitled 
films when viewers' experience is guided in this way? 

needless to say, these kinds of errors are familiar to viewers of foreign-language 
films. imperfections are part of the experience of subtitled cinema--assimilated or 
at least accepted by viewers as a necessary trade-off that highlights the inadequacy 
of translation. picking this film arbitrarily--a german language `art film', a 1970s 
remake of an earlier cinema classic by a well-known film auteur--is not meant to 
stand in as synecdochic evidence for any general features of subtitled film viewing. 
watching an amateur subtitled, `fansubbed' version of nosferatu on youtube meant 
there were more frequent and more significant errors in comparison to a theatrical 
release or dvd of the film. in both scenes, viewers' engagement with the film is 
affected by its translation. individual reactions to this situation differ. what is clear 
is that these reactions to subtitling extend beyond language or translation in many 
instances, and that they warrant investigation on this basis. 

the above example illustrates the coincidental affective response that is part of 
subtitled film viewing. this refers to elements of film experience that stimulate viewers in ways that cannot be ascribed to the linguistic or translational features of sub titling. they are coincidental in the sense that they occur alongside linguistic effects, 
but also in that they are contingent. this is a diverse field of affects: it is not a single 
type of response, nor is it opposed to the conditions of language or translation. in 
the first instance, it denotes a wide range of experiences that cannot be reduced 
to a single type of description--`affect' names an unbounded set of responses--and 
in the second instance, it is present also in and through language and translation, 
rather than being a separate mode of experience. thus there is a  potential affective 
dimension to subtitled film experience, even if each viewer does not feel it all the 
time. at times when this potential is active, viewers may feel something and react 
in a way that would not have been possible in the untranslated version of the film. 
this affective potential calls for an approach beyond the sole concerns of language 
and translation.

4
subtitling is the intimate encounter between multiple terms, sets of discourses, 
and formal elements. this expression, concerning subtitling's `intimate encounter', 
was originally used in passing (leleu, 2006: n.p.), but it signals something impor tant. subtitling enacts an encounter between distinct representational and formal 
registers: linguistic text, graphic marks, disembodied speech, and the audiovisual 
cinematic image. this means that subtitled cinema consists of a web of entan gled meanings, but also experiential aspects that exceed meaning and translation. 
subtitled films invite us to negotiate between all of these aspects. this negotiation 
is a heuristic practice that allows viewers to follow their own path of engagement; 
it is a negotiation that can bring viewers into an intimate and potentially transfor mational encounter with cinema. what may seem like an obvious claim--that sub titled films contain affective elements beyond their translational effects-- has not 
been adequately addressed in the existing film theoretical literature on subtitling. 
viewers' engagements with the play of material, visible, and invisible forces in subtitled films have yet to be addressed on a sustained basis. this concerns not just what 
viewers read or do not read: it is as much about what forces of affect and transformation are experienced.

this article examines subtitled film experience through this path of negotia tion and the potential for affective transformation. the first section engages with 
current literature on the linguistic, translational effects of subtitling, showing how 
it signals towards subtitling's other forces, which i explore from the perspective of 
affective transformation. i argue that a critique of representational approaches to 
subtitled film is needed. post-structuralist theories seem to offer one path, but they 
remain too fixed on linguistic effects for this task. i argue that apprehending sub titled cinema through affective forces is more valuable, and explain the potential 
of these forces for transformative cinematic experiences. the second section puts 
forward the practice of negotiation as a way to apprehend the multiple, indeter minate encounters in subtitled film. `apprehending' rather than `comprehending', 
as i put it throughout this essay, suggests the feelings of apprehension and doubt 
that are fundamental to cinematic experience. this is a more personal approach that 

 5 
allows the affective potential to emerge. i illustrate the practice of negotiation with 
reference again to  nosferatu and to a scene in federico fellini's  otto e mezzo  / 81/2 
(1963). the third section shows how the affective force of subtitled film viewing 
has been understood from a deleuzian perspective in different ways. but deleuzian 
negotiations are replete with gaps as well as flows. i consider what this might mean 
through two critics' work and, in the fourth section, explore the peculiar subtitling 
of jean luc godard's film socialisme (2010) in this light. negotiating this film and its 
subtitling in a deleuzian manner does not lead to a response based on meaning, as 
a representational-hermeneutic approach would seek, but to an affective response 
that appreciates the indeterminate relations between parts of the film. negotiation 
tends towards separating elements of film experience from each other. the fifth and 
final section argues that practices of negotiation need to appreciate the constitutive 
hybridity of media. in videogaming, for example, graphical text is a central element, 
despite being external to the storyworld. media relate to one another in complex 
and unknown ways, and extrapolating this insight, we can say that subtitled cinema 
performs a similar assemblage of media. i conclude the article by positing a new 
conception of subtitling's role in cinema: not one that is supplementary, but one 
that is fundamental.

\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \xi  \psi \omega \sigma \xi ff\sigma \upsilon fifl \omega ffi fflij\sigma \upsilon \sigma fl\xi ` 'fl^ \xi *\psi \xi _\upsilon \xi ff\pi \xi 

subtitled film experience consists of an affective potential that goes beyond the 
interpretive methods of language and translation. these are the privileged topics of 
current literature on subtitled cinema. this literature concerns the fidelity, authen ticity, and ideology of translation, the critical category of foreignness, the politics 
of the voice, and the complex relations between text and the audiovisual image, to 
name a few things. a quick review shows us this. for atom egoyan and ian balfour, 
the idea of subtitles animates discussion of `translation, otherness, representation, 
national identities, and the tasks of cultural interpretation' (2004: 25). these are 
all significant topics worthy of discussion. in addition, there   is a creative, produc tive moment in subtitling, as carol o'sullivan explains: `translation is by its very 

6
nature repetition--a re-performance, a re-drafting, a re-wording--but also an iterative 
process of back-and-forth movement between two texts and languages' (2011: 62). 
but there are also less neutral views on subtitling and translation: `it is a practice of 
translation that smoothes over its textual violence and domesticates all otherness 
while it pretends to bring the audience to an experience of the foreign' (nornes, 
2007: 155). for nornes, cinema should be considered as an experience of transla tion and of the foreign. this should take place on the level of spectatorial experi ence and engagement, but also be a conscious effort through the experimentation 
of filmmakers and subtitlers. this criticism remains concerned with translation as a 
linguistic issue. beyond translational matters, subtitles are, for dimitris eleftheriotis, 
`an integral component of the machinery of film' (2010: 179). questions concerning 
the foreign are still too narrow to address the range of what happens in the engagements with subtitled cinema. indeed, the terms of the foreign might be opened up 
to include formally foreign cinematic elements, as in egoyan and balfour's edited collection (2004). so there have been steps made towards appreciating subtitled cinema 
in ways that exceed language and translation. the effects of language, text, and ideology are undoubtedly important, and the conclusions in these studies are insightful. 
they appreciate subtitling's extra-linguistic forces and effects to varying degrees, but 
this dimension can be pushed further, and should be, if we are to apprehend the 
affective stakes of subtitled cinema.

any approach attempting to apprehend the affective potential of subtitled cin ema must be based on a tacit critique of representational methods. representation is 
a privileged system of knowledge and being that orders scholarly approaches. it works 
by observing the world and creating an image of it in whatever form--whether it is in 
art, politics, or humanities research. as such, it is based on a transcendental view of the 
world, where there is a separation between mind and body, subject and object, and things 
and ideas. according to this schema, humans are the privileged creatures, as advanced 
levels of knowledge, linguistic communication, and self-reflection set them apart from 
other things in the world. everything else is relegated in importance. representation is 
perpetuated through academic methods as a powerful underlying metaphysics. 

 7 

for the most part, the subtitling literature mentioned above works within the 
bounds of transcendental, humanist systems of representation, and this fails to 
address a wider range of cinematic experiences; namely, that which escapes con ventional meaning or linguistic description. these hermeneutic methods have been 
found wanting. we need a non-representational, non-human approach to subti tled cinema. considering viewing practices in terms of affectivity and negotiation 
opposes classical formulations of film experience, in which viewers are passive 
receivers of content and meaning, and viewers of subtitled film receive a translation 
in a language other than their own. by exploring the figure of negotiation in the next 
section, it is my aim to signal the limits of representational approaches to subtitled 
cinema and to rethink their methodological basis.

the terms of this debate may sound amenable to post-structuralist analysis, as 
post-structuralist theorists argue that speech, with its immediacy and presence, has 
been privileged over writing throughout the history of philosophy. subtitling has in 
fact been discussed with reference to jacques derrida before. here is nornes on this 
phenomenon of `phonocentrism' in translation:

jacques derrida wrote of a phonocentrism built on a conception of com munication that began with an ideal stability of meaning, something 
many models of translation assume in their search for secure equivalencies 
between languages. (nornes, 2007: 102)

subtitling, as a media of communication, participates in this scheme by attempt ing to transcribe some original speech into segmented lines of graphic text. but it 
never refers to just itself. this is signalled by another critic, kathleen lundeen, who 
understands subtitling as a supplement to speech, as a superfluous `visual supple ment' designed to make speech more accessible (1999: 60). but like writing and 
other graphic supplements, there is an excess of signification: subtitling `exceeds' 
translation in multiple ways (lundeen, 1999: 62). post-structuralist theories seem 
to offer a suitable framework for exploring subtitled viewing through their critique 
of representation, but they too remain beholden to language; language is their 

8
ultimate referent. this task of moving beyond the sole representational, linguistic, 
and human concerns of subtitling requires something else.

appreciating subtitled viewing through affective forces is another approach. this 
refers to emergent moments when we are awed, bewildered, confused, and otherwise 
emotionally stimulated by cinema's affective apparatus. they are non-human moments 
too--not relying on the frame of the human, as they escape the depredations of `meaning' and `understanding'. think of the great moments of cinema that rouse you: we 
cannot adequately convey these moments through transcribed dialogue in the form 
of graphic text. at the same time, there is an affective power when we watch subtitled 
cinema. but affect does not designate a single type of experience.  it emerges, as one 
critic puts it, as a `non-representational variable' (pe'rez-gonzalez, 2012: 338). in other 
words, subtitles are contingent and transformative interventions in the film, rather 
than just static signifiers. among these, i count the feelings elicited in the  nosferatu 
example. in my viewing of the film's translated version on youtube, i was moved in 
a way that would not have been present in the original, untranslated version. while 
these experiences exist as variables, they exist also in a potential state for different 
viewers and at different times. my emotional reaction to the film may contrast with the 
next viewer's boredom or lack of concentration. the contingencies of film exhibition 
and reception impinge on the latent and arbitrary character of film experience. from 
these conditions and relations, the affective potential of subtitled viewing emerges. 

affectivity challenges the interpretive power of representational methods. few 
studies of subtitled viewing have engaged with this kind of experience. short essays 
by tessa dwyer (1997; 2002) and giorgio hadi curti (2007) address film theory's 
shortage in this regard by way of reference to gilles deleuze's film-philosophy and 
non-representational theorisations of cinema. deleuze's peculiar take on film theory 
as a form of negotiation offers a way to think about subtitling and translation. i 
shall come to these sources in more detail below. this affectivity is not a new or 
recent phenomenon; rather, indeterminate relations like these are fundamental to 
film experience. they resist objectification and thus escape the critical attention of 
standard approaches to subtitled viewing. listing all the things that escape linguistic 

 9 
objectification in subtitled viewing would defeat the purpose of identifying them. in 
the nosferatu example, i alluded to the vague feelings i had as i watched. the abstract 
dynamics at work here cannot be pinned down in a concrete way. the perspective 
that i propose stresses the indeterminate and affective potential of subtitled film 
experience. but we still need to rethink what happens when we experience subti tled cinema in a way that accounts for these abstract operations. the keywords of 
phenomenology, affect, embodiment, and sensation are common in recent theorisations of cinematic experience (barker, 2009; beugnet, 2007; del ri'o, 2008; sobchack, 
2004). the encounter with subtitling in all its extra-linguistic complexity requires 
these kinds of understanding. but we need numerous perspectives here to counter act any totalising critical tendencies. leaning too heavily on them may lead us to 
disregard the other elements of cinematic experience.

\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \pi \phi \psi  \omega ff fi\phi fl\omega \sigma \upsilon \xi \sigma \upsilon \omega fi

i propose the practice of negotiation as a way to apprehend the multiple affective 
elements of subtitled cinema. this conceives film viewing in a way that accepts its 
variables and contingencies, whether in the film theatre or at home on a computer 
screen. instead of looking for the nature of meaning or for slippages in meaning 
in subtitled films, negotiation appreciates the less perceivable, fleeting moments of 
cinema. it does not aim to categorise the full range of cinematic experiences on a 
totalising scale. it also involves a personal engagement that appreciates individual 
involvement without offering an objectifying view of film experience. active, individual negotiation is central to this engagement. these characteristics allow subtitled 
cinema's affective potential to emerge. without aiming for a predefined endpoint in 
our analysis, we can understand subtitled viewing as a more dynamic experience, as 
more hands-on and heuristic than passive and hermeneutic. this type of negotiation 
is relevant to film experience in general; cinema is made of many elements like landscapes, languages, and other types of media. what distinguishes subtitled practices 
of negotiation is not just their textual and graphical markings, but also the particular 
stimuli that are not present in the untranslated film. we have to negotiate all of these 

10
things in subtitled viewing. they are added onto the original film, and require extra 
effort on the part of viewers. again, these stimuli exist in a latent state based on individual viewers' levels of engagement with the film. it is hard to say how people react 
to cinema on an individual and differential basis, but it is clear that the process and 
practice of negotiation is a central element. 

to illustrate this process of negotiation, we can look at film examples. it is apparent in any of the chaotic scenes from italian director federico fellini's films--the harem 
scene in otto e mezzo, for instance (video 1). many characters from different social and 
national backgrounds play in this scene, which is one of the lead character guido's   
reveries about the women in his life. they talk, shout, and sing, their voices adding to 
the scene's visual confusion. the subtitling is unable to deal with this babble, which 
is too quick and too disorderly to be represented accurately by textual means. 

for the foreign language viewer, looking for some meaning to navigate this 
scene, in the form of neatly arranged subtitling, has little advantage. this path may 
quickly lead to a sense of being overwhelmed by the multiple sources of dialogue 
and action. what is already a chaotic scene is made even more textually complex by 
the addition of subtitles. adopting the practice of negotiation, on the other hand, is 

video 1: the scene of guido's harem with english subtitling from 81/2 (1963) directed by  

federico fellini and distributed by criterion collection [video credit: posted by the open 

library of humanities on vimeo].

 11 
more fruitful. it accepts the variables and limits of verbal representation and allows 
us to apprehend the affective elements of the scene. we may still feel confusion, but 
it is not opposed to enjoyment of, or engagement with, the film. in this light, we can 
appreciate the visual and verbal rhythms, the artfulness of the direction, and the 
interplay of these things with the whimsical subtitling. these things signal the affective potential of subtitled cinema, if only we negotiate and concentrate not so much 
on finding meaning through subtitling. 

this example can be compared to my negotiation of nosferatu. as detailed above, 
i felt bemused with the breakdown in subtitling and also felt like the film and its 
translation interacted in some way. these are things in the film; in other words, tex tual or filmic elements. i also had to negotiate the particular conditions of exhibi tion--the amateur, `fansubbed' version of the film on youtube that i encountered. 
both these elements, textual and extra-textual or social, are part of the negotiation of 
subtitled cinema. `fansubbing' is the translation of films by audience members who, 
for one or a number of reasons, produce their own subtitled version of the film. it 
might be a rare film that has not been previously subtitled, or the fansubber might be 
unhappy with existing translations of a film they enjoy. these people are amateurs, for 
the most part, with little or no experience of professional translation. due to this, the 
quality of fansubbed translations varies widely. this is a recent phenomenon in audiovisual media that can be attributed in a large part to developments in technologies of 
distribution, which takes place primarily online (di'az cintas & mun~oz-sa'nchez, 2006; 
massidda, 2015). my experience with the fansubbed version of  nosferatu was significantly different than if i had seen it in a dedicated cinema. i encountered correct and 
partially correct translation, subtitles that fulfilled a translational role and ones that 
exceeded it, and the vagaries of online streaming, which interrupted my viewing experience, to name three points of negotiation. each of these points was mediated by the 
intricate politics and economics of watching a fansubbed version of this film online.

the practice of negotiation is a valuable heuristic because it allows subtitling's various discourses and formal registers to be apprehended in a way that allows their affective potential to emerge. this mode of viewing is aimed at apprehending, a figure of 
doubting, rather than understanding or reconciling these multiple elements, as these 

12
are figures of representation and remain too transcendental to allow viewers a more 
intimate affective engagement with the film. they remain too transcendental because  
they seek to fix a meaning on film. the analysis of films and media in this article is thus 
not intended to uncover any meanings, but to appreciate the way subtitles set us on 
a course for an affective encounter that is distinct from the original, untranslated film 
experience. in otto e mezzo, i witness the harem scene's mayhem, take stock of the many 
characters, and the various languages they speak, and prepare myself to be bombarded 
with multiple levels of dialogue, clamorous voices, and incomplete text (figure 2). 

when the subtitles come, my eyes flit between text and image and i try to sepa rate out the voices, to make sense of them. but the sense does not come. i learn to 
accept this, and i feel more at ease. this is the heuristic practice of negotiation at 
work. understood as a complex set of processes, rather than a merely translational 
tool, we can appreciate subtitles for the kinds of transformational cinematic experi ences they bring about, in which we move from one spectatorial state to another.

\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \lambda \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \psi  \omega \lambda fffifl\upsilon \phi fl\upsilon fi\psi ffi

gilles deleuze's approach to cinema, which is based on a rethinking of the relation 
between art and the world, offers a useful way to consider the negotiation of sub titled cinema. throughout his two  cinema books (2005a; 2005b), it becomes clear 

figure 2:  the scene of guido's harem with english subtitling from  81/2 (1963) 

directed by federico fellini and distributed by criterion collection.

 13 
deleuze is not using individual films simply to exemplify his theoretical points.   
cinema, rather, puts forward its own original and distinct `concepts'--it produces 
sensations and creates concepts. as such, no external or imagistic account of cinema 
is necessary. deleuze's form of film theory is peculiar, as we see below. he discusses 
cinema in order to account for the effects it has on its viewers and on the world. here,  
again, we find a critique of representational methods, which presuppose a  separation 
between cinema and the world. 

the affective force of subtitled film viewing has been understood through such 
a deleuzian, non-representational perspective by two scholars: tessa dwyer likens 
deleuze's approach to film theory-as-interstitial practice to the experience of sub titling (1997; 2002), and giorgio hadi curti has considered the bodily transforma tions enabled by subtitled viewing (2007). because of his rethinking of the relation 
between art and the world, and the critique of staid representation therein, we commonly think of deleuze as a great vitalist thinker of life, flows, fluxes, and lines of 
flight. cinematic images affect thought directly in what deleuze calls `a shock to 
thought' (2005b: 156). this is one version of deleuzianism, but his thinking of the 
void, and of the gaps in knowledge, perception, and communication should also be 
acknowledged.

dwyer recognises this, and shows how deleuze occupies the critical interstices 
between film theory and philosophy. in the two  cinema books, references to phi losophers and to filmmakers stand alongside each other and frequently perform the 
same illustrative function, despite the disparity between the history of philosophy 
and the much shorter legacy of film theory. this is where the novelty of deleuze's 
cinema books lay upon their initial reception: he does not oppose philosophy and 
film theory, or claim primacy for one over the other. here, film theory is an intersti tial practice, a hybrid form. dwyer writes:

in professing his commitment to the interval, the gap, the "and," and the "inbetween," deleuze effectively stops film theory in its tracks. by effecting this 
pause, he actually produces a change in direction, a navigational maneuver. 
(1997: 164)

14
dwyer appreciates the differential encounters between formal and discursive regis ters at work in deleuze, subtitling, and film theory, as well as the indeterminate sites  
in-between. she compares his methodology to the processes of subtitling and dub bing because each approach adopts difference between discourses as its  structuring 
principle: in deleuze, film theory meets philosophy; in subtitling, an original 
 discursive system meets another (figure 3). dwyer argues that subtitling and dubbing 
`re-negotiate' the terms of deleuze's work on cinema, as they require `intersemiotic 
translation, or translation between unlike and incommensurable terms' (2002: 63).   
this produces a `methodology structured upon holes, intervals and gaps' (dwyer, 
2002: 62). in this light, subtitling's encounter with its outside can be apprehended 
by adopting a practice of negotiation. 

curti addresses another way to apprehend subtitled viewing. he considers sub titled films as a transformational experience in the context of deleuzian non-repre sentational theory. in this frame, the task is to analyse the effects and functioning 
of subtitling, rather than its meaning or representations (curti, 2009: 205). curti 
engages with the russian film night watch (timur bekmambetov, 2004), which was 

figure 3:  the doubly subtitled gilles deleuze, in interview [source: youtube   

documentary].

 15 
treated with experimental subtitling upon its international dvd release. its `living 
subtitles' are animate and move around the screen in various ways that respond to 
the film's action. they pulse, deform, and disintegrate according to diegetic action. 
there is a swimming pool scene, for example, where a boy gets a nosebleed and his 
subtitled dialogue, `come to me', which is already in red font, graphically transforms 
into what looks like blood coming out of his nose ( video 2). there is much poten tial for this type of creative intervention in cinematic translation, as we shall see in 
the next section. as curti explains,  night watch 's subtitles have a transformative 
potential, and need to be considered beyond simply representational concerns. he 
understands this in terms of the bodily effects on viewers. 

both of these critics raise key issues on negotiating subtitled cinema beyond 
the framework of linguistic translation. in her essay, dwyer spends a lot of time on 
deleuze's method, without fully engaging in traditional film analysis. her decision 
not to engage in close film analysis falls in with non-representational strategy. this 
kind of methodological innovation is welcome and necessary. non-representational 
approaches to film require us to rethink how we do film analysis, and dwyer's 

video 2: the swimming pool scene from night watch (2004), directed by timur bekmambetov and distributed by twentieth century fox [video credit: posted by the open library of 

humanities on vimeo].

16
response is to engage hong kong action films--the killer (john woo, 1989) is her primary example--through negotiating the formal operations of subtitling. her analysis 
leaves us with no clear programme on how to proceed with non-representational 
approaches to cinema study, as they are not amenable to systematic approaches. 
curti, too, attempts to push analysis of subtitled films beyond traditional transla tional concerns like accuracy, fidelity, and authenticity, and his approach positions 
subtitles as affective bodily expressions, rather than as signifiers of linguistic mean ing. this is one way of moving towards a scholarly understanding of what is at stake 
in affective and transformational film experience.

this deleuzian approach nuances the concept of negotiation, which i under stand here as a process and practice of film viewing beyond the usual negotiations 
of multiple filmic elements. it signals the indeterminacy of these elements, and how 
they perform gaps in meaning. the emphasis on deleuze also helps to justify a nonrepresentational approach to subtitled film viewing. close reading, case studies, and 
hermeneutic methods are all part of the structure of the humanist edifice that nonrepresentational and affective encounters resist. dwyer points out that the interpretive norm of close reading, where scholars dissect film scenes in detail in order to 
illustrate their theoretical ideas, `effectively denies [film theory's] radical indetermi nacy' (1997: 554). attempting to rationalise, to provide `proof' of certain film-theo retical arguments is not the critical gesture that is needed. we need instead to open 
ourselves to uncertainty. deleuze works in this uncertain and incommensurable gap 
between film and theory. his cinema books engage the instabilities of this gap, while 
attempting to preserve the unique energies of each term. the method of negotiation 
suggests the material and vital forces that become apparent with the opening up of 
this gap. representational models accommodate the interplay of discourses, but they 
do so in a way that smoothes over their differences in favour of producing binding 
and transcendent meanings. a practice of affective negotiation, on the other hand, 
appreciates that theory and filmic relations remain irreducible to each other: they 
have to be apprehended on their own terms, and without a set of pre-determined 
interpretive principles. in this way, dwyer and curti are right to persist with abstract 
film-philosophical theorisation. they elaborate important non-representational 

 17 
approaches to subtitled film experience. the deleuzian perspective on negotiation is 
one of fissure as well as flow. exploring this is one way to nuance understanding of 
the practice and process of negotiation.

\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \sigma \upsilon \psi \xi  \omega fffifl ffiffliffjfiff`fl'

we can explore this practice of negotiation further through a film example. jeanluc godard's  film socialisme  (2010) experiments with subtitling and challenges 
normative conceptual practices of reading subtitled films. godard is not concerned 
with making the film fully comprehensible in a linguistic sense: its subtitling acts 
as another layer in the film's constitution of cinematic elements. for these reasons, 
adopting practices of negotiation better places us to apprehend the film and its 
subtitles. despite his own wishes to show an untranslated version, godard pre sented film socialisme at the 2010 edition of cannes film festival with what he 
called navajo english subtitling. one critic has usefully parsed the linguistic aspects 
of this:

*  all subtitles are composed of a single line, with one to five words per 

subtitle.

*  subtitles are mostly composed of two (40.7% of total) or three words (49% 

of total).

*  there are wide spaces between the words, which are generally written in 

lower case, with the exception of proper nouns.

*  there is no punctuation anywhere in the subtitles. these two elements 

mean that it is very hard to know when one sentence begins or ends, and 
whether it is affirmative, interrogative, etc.

*  verbs are (almost) never conjugated (tenses have to be guessed at).

*  there are (almost) no pronouns or articles.

*  two or three words are sometimes aggregated to form a single word.

(bre'an, 2011: n.p.)

due to this lack of linguistic and grammatical order, viewers have to work on a level 
unfamiliar to their prior cinematic experiences. negotiation with an unfamiliar and 

18
uncertain subtitling style is required to apprehend the film's experimental trans lation strategies. its disruptive strategies push against the act of translation, even 
resisting communication in general (niessen, 2013: 4). subtitling and translation act 
here in a way that demands analysis from an extra-linguistic perspective. negotiation 
provides one useful heuristic.

the opening of the film provides a useful diagnosis of the affective and trans formative potential of subtitling (video 3). at the beginning, the open space of the 
mediterranean appears after the credits and without preamble, with the lush majesty 
of its midnight blues. as the scene plays on, the vessel - the ill-fated costa concordia on 
which the action unfolds - is not apparent yet. despite the complex strategies of narrative 
alienation the film develops, it contains some striking images. the interplay between 
these images, which are some moments of real beauty in a traditional film-aesthetic  
sense, and godard's disruptive strategies is significant. the clash of beautiful or sublime, in these images of the mediterranean, and a tone of wilful and flippant obscu rity, familiar across godard's work, is given added complexity through the encounter 
with an unfamiliar form of subtitling. it is stylised, which contrasts with the usual 

video 3: the opening with `navajo english' subtitling of film socialisme (2010), directed by 

jean-luc godard and distributed by new wave films [video credit: posted by the open 

library of humanities on vimeo].

 19 
stylistic transparency of subtitling. the first dialogue we hear is two off-screen char acters conversing:

b. maris: l'argent est un bien public.
alias: comme l'eau alors?
b. maris: exactement.

to the french speaker there is nothing unusual about this dialogue. it is when god ard brings the film to cannes and is forced to bring it with english subtitling that it 
gets interesting. the subtitles for these three lines of dialogue simply read:

money  public  water
there is no punctuation, sentence structure, or the usual clarity and efficiency we 
have come to expect from subtitling here. watching with the scenarist's notes in 
hand (godard, 2010), the characters in this sequence can be identified as b. maris, 
alissa, mathias, constance, and ludovic. their location in relation to each other and 
to the image is unsure, and our sense of their relationships with each other is tenu ous. who these people are is unknown. beyond this narrative confusion, it is soon 
apparent that the film's subtitling is not what we have come to expect or require. in 
fact, it seems to be a unique style of subtitling, for which there are no terms of reference. rather than clarifying what is being said, the subtitling further complicates 
the encounters between text, image, speech, and writing. it operates not only on the 
dialogue, as normal subtitling does, but produces an extra aesthetic or formal layer 
in the film. apprehending this extra layer is not straightforward, nor is it directly 
comparable to other cinematic traditions. this is where traditional representational 
analysis and close readings founder. a different approach is needed. the practice of 
negotiation appreciates what lies beyond language and translation here. 

the film sets us on a course of spatial and material negotiation of its subtitles. 
they are located in a subordinate position near the bottom of the screen, but their 
importance is commensurate with the image due to their renewed aesthetic function. 
these contrastive qualities encourage the frame to be carved up into hierarchised 

20
areas, which do not pre-exist the subtitled version. constant encounters between the 
audiovisual image and the subtitles complicate, rather than clarify, engagement with 
the film. attention is directed away from the image and towards the translated text. 
having to read the subtitles and then engage with the original image, or vice versa, 
disrupts the idealised viewing experience, which is usually just concerned with visual 
filmic space. the materiality of subtitling, then, is evinced by constant oscillation 
between the narrative depth of the film and its surface where the subtitles unfold. it 
is pronounced when dialogue returns after there has been a stretch without speech, 
when viewers have become accustomed to looking at the image without having to 
negotiate the subtitles. godard plays on these spatial, temporal, and material rela tions. the film's subtitling calls on its viewers to make a decision regarding inter pretation: what patterns emerge, what syntax can be consolidated from the titles, 
and so on. but it also exceeds this kind of intentionality. it circulates in a sphere of 
uncertainty, where the relations between money, the public, and water are indeter minate. accepting this indeterminacy leads viewers to a different kind of engage ment based less on sense making and intentionality and more on affective forms 
of experience. even accepting that this interpretation-indeterminacy binary is not 
entirely adequate, there is a kind of submission to doubt that i would like to suggest 
is not typical of classical representational frameworks of spectatorship. 

the film socialisme example illustrates the practical response and transforma tional potential of practices of negotiation. first of all, it signals breakdown in lan guage and meaning, in transcendental representational systems. this is the standard 
film theoretical response to issues in subtitling, as we can see in the film's commentators (bre'an, 2011; niessen, 2013). second of all, through our modified deleuzianism--
the one of gaps rather than connection--we begin to see the constitutive gaps of film 
experience. aspects of the practice of negotiation particular to subtitled modes of 
experience are disorderly. it engages with fissure and indeterminacy--characteristics 
of the deleuzian mode of negotiation. encounters between spatial, temporal, and 
material elements in subtitled films pose a challenge, to which the heuristic practice 
of negotiation may respond. rather than starting off with some idealised conditions, 
it is important to acknowledge the fundamental indeterminacy and instability of 

 21 
film experience. if we are to conceptualise subtitled viewing practices afresh, this 
starting point saves us having to correctively work backwards. apprehending a film 
like film socialisme and its experimental subtitling is an unfamiliar undertaking. it 
creates a novel set of formal and aesthetic conditions and film scholarship does not 
have a large or established vocabulary with which to deal with this. i propose meth odological terms like  encounter, negotiation, affect, and transformative experience as 
ways to understand the broader set of processes at work when we apprehend subti tled cinema. these terms account for the broadened range of spectatorial activities 
in subtitled film experience. this is not to renounce the complexity of film specta torship in the first place, or to abandon the issues posed through representational 
approaches. we can, however, appreciate more fully the range of experiences cinema 
brings about by rethinking our approaches. with this said, we have to think about 
the methodological limitations of negotiation and deleuzian perspectives.

\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \upsilon \phi \psi \omega \pi \xi \pi ff\phi  \sigma fi\xi  fl\lambda ffifflff\pi \sigma ff\pi fflfi

all media are made up of multiple elements, including bits of other media; with cinema, this is especially the case. the concept of negotiation, as it has been explored in 
this article, tends to conceptualise film experience as made up of discrete elements: 
visual images, spoken dialogue, and written, translated text. however, considering   
these elements individually might not be a useful critical move. the propensity 
towards transcendent categorisation appears again, threatening to overshadow the 
complex processes and relations in which all media are implicated. this complexity 
is glossed over when attempts are made to reduce the functioning of media to rep resentational frameworks. media interact with each other and with other elements 
outside themselves. they do so in ways that exceed explanation, intention, and even 
perception. we can counterbalance the tendency towards separation by addressing 
the constitutive hybridity of media. doing so also provides some critical distance 
from the deleuzian perspective on negotiation explored above. 

subtitling and videogaming make for an interesting comparison in terms of the 
alternate processes of textual and affective negotiations involved in each, and how 
each relates to the hybridity of media. videogames consist of a level field between 

22
story world and external graphical elements. the graphical user interface (gui) is 
made up of images, icons, and texts that lie outside diegetic action. it is difficult 
to conceive contemporary videogames without home screens, pause menus, and 
in-game overlaid text--including, but not limited to, subtitling. but these elements 
make sense of diegetic action. negotiation of graphical elements in videogame is a 
requisite set of actions; gamers know this when they turn on their consoles. unlike 
subtitled text, they are an original part of videogame media. whereas, in cinema, 
subtitled text is, for the most part, added post-filmically and without aesthetic intention, in videogaming, it is a central element that does not transcend its material, 
spatiotemporal conditions. despite their differences in origin, both videogames and 
subtitles require negotiation and both set us on a course of affective transformation. 
which aspect matters here--cause or effect, process or affect--depends on the theo retical perspective from which it is approached. this allows us to add one final piece 
to the puzzle of negotiation, concerning the hybridity and relationality of subtitled 
cinematic media.

recent transformations in media cultures and technologies have led to various 
reconceptualisations of how media systems are organised and relate to each other--
in other words, their ontological status. to name two: there is henry jenkins's idea 
of convergence culture (2006), in which the circulation of media content as well as 
the participation of its consumers is paramount; and there is jay bolter and richard 
grusin's idea of the remediation of media (bolter & grusin, 1999), which explains 
how computing has refashioned older media. a big part of jenkins's account of 
media convergence is the rise of participatory culture. the nosferatu example, which 
is based on an amateur fansubbed version on youtube is apposite here. youtube is 
a relatively novel media phenomenon in its models of uploading and dissemination. 
the `media' we are referring to in this case includes not just the images and subtitled 
words that are visible and legible on the screen, but also the audience members, the 
`fansubbers' and `prosumers', that created this version of the film. as in the example 
of videogaming, what matters here is the process and practice of negotiation that 
forms a significant part of our experience of subtitled cinema, and not details of the 
origins of its individual parts. subtitled cinema is made up not so much of discrete 

 23 
elements but a complex network of processes, relations, and desires. not all of these 
lie within the agency of humans. external forces in the interactions of media, such 
as artificial intelligence or the geophysical basis of media, play a role also. here, the 
agenda is no longer to ask `what is media?', but is about how media interrelate to 
each other and to external elements in non-instrumental and non-humanist ways. 
we approach this situation not by asking an ontologising question--in other words, 
representational and humanist--as in discussions of convergence and remediation, 
but by thinking about how to apprehend this media assemblage. practices of nego tiation are one way to do this. negotiation is sceptical towards transcendental cate gorisation, appreciates affective potentials, and is attentive to the hybridity of media 
and interaction outside the frame of human action and reason.

\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \psi \lambda \xi 

in light of the themes explored in this article, we can conclude that subtitling is 
not merely supplemental to cinema. rather than separating out subtitled cinematic 
images into their individual constituent parts, they can be understood as a complex 
set of relations and processes. subtitling is a fundamental part of cinema in numer ous ways: historical, linguistic, and affective too. this article has offered some methodological proposals for analysis of subtitled cinema beyond what has been offered 
in the relatively small film-theoretical literature to date. this analysis of subtitling 
and approaches to subtitled cinema can be understood in relation to the critical tendency that seeks to get beyond traditional interpretive and representational struc tures of film experience. a host of transformational experiences that were previously 
absent in this field of discourse are opened up for further analysis: the multiple and 
indeterminate parts of watching subtitled films. this is why i have stressed subti tling's affective potential. when we apprehend cinema as a locus of amorphous and 
potential relations, the heuristic scope is expanded. the stability attributed to cin ema by traditional film theory, on ideological grounds, is challenged by accounts of 
the instability of cinematic representation. understanding subtitled cinema on the 
level of affective and transformative experiences has thus been offered as an anti dote to well-worn forms of cinematic analysis. further analysis of the performative 

24
subtitling in  film socialisme , for example, could be undertaken. this form of cin ematic expression is only beginning to be explored by filmmakers and fansubbers, as 
well as recent television series like  sherlock (bbc) and house of cards  (netflix). new 
technologies open up potential for further formal innovations, like the fansubbing 
in nosferatu. research on creative subtitling could respond to these innovations--a 
new set of aesthetic possibilities in the history of cinema. already some scholars in 
translation studies have begun to explore this work (foerster, 2010; pe'rez-gonzae'z, 
2012; mcclarty, 2014).

subtitled cinema involves a redistribution of spectatorial attention. moving 
beyond the idealised frame of spectatorship, it should be remembered that this 
attention is finite--a certain economy of attention. on the linguistic level, it is clear 
that subtitles go beyond what can be processed representationally through their 
spatiotemporal excesses. but there is a host of other excesses involved. these are 
the multiple and shifting activities of watching, listening, but also reading, translat ing, and even problem solving (naficy, 2004: 146). i am not claiming that negotia tion is not proper to cinematic experience in the first place--recall cinema's early 
deprecation as a bastard art, which involved its combination of already existing art 
forms--but that engagement with subtitled cinema enacts a peculiar set of negotia tions, which deserve critical attention on their own terms. a range of other activities 
supplements the classic audiovisual engagement. these are processes that transform 
through time as films develop, but also in the space of the film's reception, where 
the indeterminate rhythms of the body and sensorium, of social relations, and of aesthetic engagement proliferate. to concentrate our entire intellectual energies on the 
dialogue or diegetic action in  nosferatu or film socialisme would clearly be to miss 
out on some important aspects of the overall cinematic experience. the possibility 
of escaping language and representation is a heavyweight issue. but rather than take 
on such a task, the modest engagement with speculation and acceptance of indeterminacy is one response to the aporia of humanist methods. negotiation as a practice 
works through these conditions. beyond deleuzian approaches, this criticism could 
go all the way down in any reaction against representational systems. it signals the 

 25 
inexorable presence of language, even in moments where it is being resisted, as in 
post-structuralist theories, which i considered earlier.

juxtaposing deleuze and subtitling through negotiation of both--the strategy in 
this article--elaborates the differential constitution of each of these, where individual 
parts are blurred and cannot be separated from their interrelations. the argument   
through negotiation leads to the point that an affective or transformative encounter 
in subtitled film experience demands forms of analysis that exceed the bounds of 
traditional close reading. i argued that this kind of negotiation is relevant also to 
subtitled film experience. the processes are comparable, in their synthesis of differ ent registers of experience--aural, visual, graphic, aesthetic, textual. standard film 
theories will look at elements individually. we should take them together in order   
to nuance the concept of negotiation. developing the theoretical heritage of 
marshall mcluhan rather than andre' bazin, this approach to media hybridity and   
film experience is about cinema as media rather that cinema  qua cinema, which 
is more in line with bazin's directly ontological project. it is about understanding 
subtitles as media and subtitled cinema as a hybrid, relational experience. we learn, 
in fact, that all media is hybrid. this is difficult enough to accept. accepting that 
media work beyond and without our human frames of understanding, then, is the 
next step.

\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi  \psi \upsilon \pi \xi \omega \xi ff\pi ff

the author declares that they have no competing interests.

fi\sigma fl\xi \delta  \gamma \omega \xi fl\sigma \pi ff

the video clips used in this article have been sourced from critical commons, a public media archive and fair use advocacy network which supports the use of media 
for scholarly research. for more information, see: http://www.criticalcommons.org/. 
the open library of humanities has uploaded these clips to the video-sharing web site vimeo which is compatible with the olh's ssl certificate and https protocol. 

26
\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi  \sigma \upsilon \phi \xi \pi \psi \omega \theta ff\xi \upsilon 

niall flynn is phd candidate in lincoln school of film & media, university of lincoln, 
uk. his project examines recent approaches to materiality in media theory, and in particular to media ecologies. he welcomes correspondence at nialljf@gmail.com.

\gamma fifl\upsilon \xi ffifflij`i\psi i\upsilon \theta '

many thanks to laura rascaroli for guidance through earlier versions of this essay, 
and to each anonymous peer reviewer for their responses along the way. 

^i\phi i\pi i\upsilon fii'

beugnet, m 2007  cinema and sensation: french film and the art of transgression . 

edinburgh: edinburgh university press. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/ 
edinburgh/9780748620425.001.0001
bolter, j d and grusin, r 1999 remediation: understanding new media. cambridge, 

ma: mit press. pmcid: pmc1171619.
bre'an, s  2011 godard english cannes: the reception of  film socialisme 's "navajo 

english" subtitles. senses of cinema, 60.
curti, g h  2009 beating words to life: subtitles, assemblage(s)capes, expression. 

geojournal, 74: 201-208. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10708-008-9221-1
deleuze, g 2005a cinema 1: the movement-image, trans. tomlinson, h and habberjam, b. london: continuum.
deleuze, g  2005b  cinema 2: the time-image , trans. tomlinson, h and galeta, r. 

london: continuum.
del ri'o, e  2008  deleuze and the cinemas of performance: powers of affection .  

edinburgh: edinburgh university press.
di'az cintas, j and mun~oz-sa'nchez, p 2006 fansubs: audiovisual translation in an 

amateur environment. the journal of specialised translation: 37-52.
dwyer, t 1997 straining to hear (deleuze). south atlantic quarterly, 96(3): 543-62.
dwyer, t 2002 subtitles, dubbing, subbing: deleuze in translation. polygraph, 14: 61-77.
egoyan, a  and  balfour, i  (eds.) 2004  subtitles: on the foreignness of film .  

cambridge, ma: alphabet city and mit press.

 27 
eleftheriotis, d 2010 reading subtitles: travelling films meet foreign spectators. 

chapter 8 in  cinematic journeys: film and movement . edinburgh: edinburgh 
university press.
foerster, a 2010 towards a creative approach in subtitling: a case study. approaches 

to translation studies, 32: 81-98.
godard, j-l  2010  film socialisme . available at:   http://www.newwavefilms.co.uk/

assets/465/film_socialisme_english__subtitles_plus_dialogue.pdf [last accessed 
9 december 2014].
jenkins, h 2006 convergence culture: where old and new media collide . new york: 

new york university press.
leleu, c  2006 sous-titrage.  ataa: association des traducteurs et adapteurs de 

l'audiovisuel. available at: http://www.traducteurs-av.org/index.php/nosmetiers/sous-titrage.html [last accessed 10 december 2014].
lundeen, k 1999 pumping up the word with cinematic supplements.  film criti cism, 24(1): 60-72.
massidda, s  2015  audiovisual translation in the digital age: the italian fan subbing phenomenon . basingstoke: palgrave macmillan. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1057/9781137470379
mcclarty, r 2014 in support of creative subtitling: contemporary context and theoretical framework. perspectives: studies in translatology , 22(4): 592-606. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0907676x.2013.842258
\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi  \sigma  2004 epistolarity and textuality in accented films. in: egoyan, a & balfour, 

i (eds.) subtitles: on the foreignness of film . cambridge, ma: alphabet city and 
mit press. pp. 131-51.
niessen, n 2013 access denied: godard palestine representation. cinema journal, 

52(2): 1-22. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/cj.2013.0003
nornes, a m 2007 cinema babel: translating global cinema. minneapolis: university 

of minnesota press. pmid: 17981814.
o'sullivan, c 2011  translating popular film . london: palgrave. doi:  http://dx.doi.

org/10.1057/9780230317543

hall: the university and the secular crisis2
introduction
analyses of the crisis of capitalism that impacted the world economy in 2008 have 
attempted to provide a coherent explanation for on-going stagnation, characterised 
by: a plateauing of gross domestic product linked to slow or no growth; unemploy ment or chronic underemployment; attrition of real wages; and low levels of invest ment and productive capacity and capability. as bellamy foster and yates (2014) have 
argued, this crisis has underwritten a concomitant increase in inequality and social 
dislocation and `these two realities of deepening stagnation and growing inequality 
have created a severe crisis for orthodox (or neoclassical) economics.' indeed, for 
critics of mainstream economics the point of analysis has focused on the idea of 
systemic, structural and persistent crisis, rooted in issues of overproduction, underconsumption or the tendency of the rate of profit to fall (basu and vasudevan 2011; 
carchedi and roberts 2013; harvey 2013).

these critiques have been grounded in a history of capitalism that has been 
punctuated by major structural crises which prefigure long recessions or depres sions, such as those that began in 1873, 1929 and 2008. however, they have also 
been rooted in the material reality of events, with a focus on structural, cross-sector 
explanations, against which both national and transnational counter-measures 
might be scrutinised. these historical and material counter-measures are attempts 
to re-establish stability in the production, circulation and accumulation of surplus 
value. however, pace marx (2004), it has been argued that in the longer-term such 
tactics are doomed given the totalising nature of capitalist social relations, because 
no balanced growth or equilibrium can be achieved through the processes of pro duction for the market. this point is developed by bellamy foster and yates (2014) 
who note that the failure to deliver full employment, alongside rising inequality 
that has grown in spite of both increased educational attainment and labour pro ductivity, have damaged the legitimacy of capitalism.

legitimacy is a pivotal concept because both state and transnational responses 
have re-shaped the idea of "the public good" and of the purpose of notionally pub lic institutions, especially in the english contexts to which i primarily refer here 
(campaign for the public university 2014). in the face of a global crisis of investment, 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 3 
growth and profitability, this has underpinned attempts to restructure english uni versities by commodifying and enclosing the services that they offer. one critical 
outcome has been to place decision-making power and agency in the hands of transnational finance capital (mcgettigan 2013). thus, higher education (he) in this con text is increasingly driven by processes of financialisation, enacted through: increased 
student debt, in order to enable study as a positional good; the institutional recourse 
to bond markets to fund growth; and the sale of the student loan book (ball 2012; 
willetts 2013). moreover, he is increasingly marketised through the abolition of student number controls and by encouraging alternative providers or public-private 
partnerships. finally, those who work in universities are disciplined by performance 
information, the use of impact measures, technological and organisational innova tion and increased privatisation and outsourcing of services (hall 2014a).

each of these tactical responses to crisis exacerbates tensions surrounding the 
idea that a public or social he might underpin the university's organising princi ples. therefore, those who labour in the university risk being placed in asymmetrical 
opposition to the state's imposition of financialisation and marketisation. this opposition occurs just as academic production inside the university moves from its formal 
subsumption under capitalist social relations to its real subsumption (marx 2004), 
in order to build the productive capacity of the he sector. one important impact of 
this process is the disruption of the relationships and cultural narratives of he and 
the subsequent generation of anxiety (crawford 2014; hall 2014b). in part, this is a 
function of an entrepreneurial turn (davies 2014), as universities are encouraged to 
embody the idea of the student-as-consumer or partner, rather than as co-operator 
(higher education academy [hea] 2014). this process is cultural in re-framing the 
relationships between university, student and academic. however, it also indicates 
the emergence of new relations of production inside the university, which are gov erned by exchange and profit alongside debt and personal choice, rather than the 
production of socially-useful knowledge (wendling 2009).

yet such anxieties are amplified because in spite of the range of counter-measures 
that have been deployed, the global economy has failed to re-establish historic levels 
of accumulation and growth (bellamy foster and yates 2014; carchedi and roberts 2013). 

hall: the university and the secular crisis4
this article is situated against the changing landscape of english he and argues 
that this systemic failure or  secular crisis of capitalism (cleaver 1993; hansen 1955; 
krugman 2014; summers 2014) and its political ramifications, are central to any 
analysis of the restructuring of the terrain of he and of the concomitant impact 
on the idea of the university. this analysis is rooted in a critique of the structural 
weaknesses exhibited by global capitalism and the disciplinary role of the integral 
state in shaping a space for further capital accumulation. it is important because it 
points towards the revolutionary potential of capitalism to overcome barriers and 
release surplus value for reinvestment and accumulation. this return to a political 
economy of he enables academics and students to understand how the organising 
principles and curricula of he are shaped historically and materially inside capitalism 
as a social totality. thus, it is argued that such an analysis points towards postcapitalist alternatives beyond the university, which are pedagogically-grounded in 
open co-operative approaches that form different ways of knowing the world (hall 
2014a; winn 2014a). at issue is the development of subjectivity that is based on 
socialised rather than privatised knowledge.

the secular crisis
the idea of the secular crisis of capitalism has a lineage back to keynes' (1936) analysis of the great depression and hansen's (1955) focus on secular stagnation in the 
same era. this work, which focused on economic drag factors related to low popu lation-growth, war and imperial ambition and society's capacity for innovation, was 
then developed by baran and sweezy (1966) and magdoff and sweezy (1987) whose 
analysis was rooted in the distorting gravity that monopoly finance capital had on 
the productive economy. latterly, economists such as the former us secretary to the 
treasury, larry summers (2014) and the nobel laureate paul krugman (2014), have 
extended the argument about the secular, systemic stagnation of global capitalism in 
the aftermath of the 2008 economic crisis with a keynesian analysis that highlights 
ramifications for macroeconomic policy. they argue that slow population growth in 
the global north, lower levels of educational attainment, rising levels of inequality 
and massive levels of public and private debt, have acted as brakes on the global econhall: the university and the secular crisis 5 
omy. the argument is that relatively high unemployment or under-employment, low 
interest rates and liquidity traps and an unwillingness to invest in capital projects or 
people, have led to below-trend aggregate demand in all sectors of the economy. as a 
result the new normal for the global economy might be on-going weak or zero growth.

this mainstream analysis has been developed in the context of the uk as a dedeveloping economy by elliott and atkinson (2012). they argue that the historical 
trend for the united kingdom (uk) economy in the last century has been of managed 
decline arrested by quick fixes like access to north sea oil revenues and the stimu lus of the deregulated city. here, the uk has emerged from its post-2008 recession 
slower than it had during the great depression and this has revealed the economy's 
structural defects, which had been covered by three decades of financialisation. these 
defects include: chronic debt; a long-term attrition on real wages; illiteracy amongst 
large numbers of the public; a pension time-bomb; no long-term energy plan; a deficit in tax receipts, which makes socialised underwriting of the welfare state prob lematic; dysfunctional banking services; an overreliance on exports to europe at a 
time of market contraction; and a dependency on the imports of assets including 
skilled labour. in this argument, a series of roll-backs of labour rights through attacks 
on trades unions, plus privatisation that enforces market efficiencies, has focused 
minds on productivity, but has also led to private debt underwriting consumption as 
incomes are squeezed.

in these neoclassical models, the solutions proposed are a holistic re-focusing of 
economic analysis on ideas like total factor productivity or human capital theory. 
as a result, in he the demand is for a perfectly functioning market, inside which 
entrepreneurs can be persuaded to invest so that: first, positional educational ser vices are made available to each individual or family, who can be motivated to choose 
to become entrepreneurial and to invest in their own education, skills and produc tivity (davies 2014); second, that state-sponsored infrastructures are opened-up for 
investment through a transnational policy framework; and third, that access is ena bled through credit. the marketisation of he then enables narratives of student-asentrepreneur or as partner to emerge and shapes the production and circulation 
of data as a means for encouraging the role of investment banks and publishing 

hall: the university and the secular crisis6
houses in developing alternative services. the key here is the individual's willingness 
to invest in her own human capital, in order to become productive and as a result 
socially-useful. one of the outcomes is the need to recalibrate he around the logic of 
ensuring that the consumers of education have sufficient data or information upon 
which to make their investment choices. here the logic of responses to the secular 
crisis point towards failures in the functioning of competition and global markets 
(bellamy foster and yates 2014; jimeno et al. 2014).

taking a marxist critique, carchedi and roberts (2013) argue that the heart of 
the crisis is far from the imperfect functioning of market economics and lies instead 
in the collapse of production for profit by the private owners of the means of production. they argue that the current crisis is a function of a collapse in global rates of 
profit and that until there has been sufficient creative destruction of unproductive 
capital (schumpeter 1975), accompanied by the deleveraging and liquidation of bad 
or toxic assets, neither productivity nor profitability will return. the lack of a return 
from the productive economy means that firms and corporations have no motivation 
to invest in new capital or in the development of their employees (broadbent 2012).

thus, even the real subsumption of sectors that were previously unproductive 
and not directly part of the valorisation process cannot halt the slide in productiv ity and the ongoing weakness of growth in the global north. this demonstrates the 
persistent inability of surplus capital to recombine with surplus labour, in order to 
valorise itself. the structural problems related to low levels of profitability damage 
investment in capital and lead to the hoarding of money capital by corporations 
attempting to deleverage debt or shore-up their share price. here the pre-eminence 
and power of monopoly finance capital is a drag on the productive capacity of the 
economy. moreover this inability to recover productive capacity is amplified by a 
transfer of assets from populations to corporations, which then underwrites the 
transfer of responsibility for recovering productivity from corporations to individu als who need to take on debt in order to become productive.

however, cleaver (1993; 2000) has argued that these types of tactical countermeasures cannot resolve the underlying problems of the system, which are rooted in 
the limits of productive expansion and accumulation. this transfer of responsibility 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 7 
to the individual and the failure of capitalism to provide either full employment or 
greater equality mean that these very counter-measures undermine the legitimacy 
of the system as a whole. for instance, a perceived wealth transfer across generations 
and social classes lay at the core of the occupy movement's focus on the 1 per cent 
(schwartz 2012). thus, for cleaver (1993, n. pag.):

secular crisis means the continuing threat to the existence of capitalism 
posed by antagonistic forces and trends which are inherent in its social 
structure and which persist through short term fluctuations and major 
restructurings.

these persistent narratives describe both a systemic crisis that is structural in nature 
(i.e. not grounded in one sector or region of the global economy)  and the potential 
for a clash of social forces that emerges from the global inability to address either 
its causes or its outcomes. crucially, this also includes the services and commodities 
produced or circulated by the university as it is made productive of value.

the university and the structuring realities  of the law of value
at the intersection of marketisation and financialisation, english he is seen as an 
investment opportunity (bain and company 2012; byrne 2014; hancock 2014). the 
use of policy  both to open-up commercial access to public services  and to raise stu dent debt aligns with the global stimulation of demand for educational commodities. 
at issue is how transnational networks of policymakers, finance capital, educational 
technology firms, publishers and so on can make the he sector profitable (ball 2012). 
it is increasingly the law of value and control of the labour-power that forms the 
source of value, which sets the tenor for the relationships between the university, the 
state and finance capital. here, the production, circulation and accumulation of  surplus value connect educational commodities and the relations of production that create them, to ideas of entrepreneurialism, innovation and growth (rubin 1972). thus, 
the ability to reorganise universities, in order to drive efficiencies and to increase 
productivity, alters the social nature of academic work.

hall: the university and the secular crisis8
this material change to the form and content of academic work emerges from the 
value of the commodities that academics produce, for instance: research outputs and 
knowledge transfer; feedback on student work and curriculum content; and learning 
analytics. these products have  both a use-value, in that they enable someone to do 
something useful or extend knowledge for its own sake and an exchange-value, in 
that they can be exchanged for other commodities or sets of commodities including 
money (hm government 2013; willetts 2014). it is the transnational exchange-value 
of academic commodities, including academic labour-power, that enables universi ties to compete. this duality of use and exchange also enables universities to drive 
down the costs of academic labour, for instance through precarious employment, 
and the use of educational technologies and lean organisational management methodologies. whilst he becomes a sector that produces value directly, it also does so 
through partnerships between universities and transnational corporations like pub lishers and venture capitalists, for example in massive online open courses (moocs) 
(hall 2014a). as a result, it is important to see the value produced by academic labour 
as a social relationship that is governed by the labour time it takes to produce and 
circulate academic commodities in a global market. this value is then reflected in 
the relationship between those commodities and the ways in which their speed of 
production and circulation can be quickened.

hence, value is important in the relationship of he to the secular crisis because 
of the changing historical and material nature of academic labour (hall 2014a; winn 
2014b; winn 2015). under the pressures of marketisation, the idea that academic 
identity is shaped by significant levels of autonomy has been eroded and the process 
of incorporating academic labour and its commodities under capitalist social rela tions has taken two forms. first, under the  formal subsumption of academic labour, 
there is no significant difference in the mode of production of educational commodities and there is limited technological or organisational change imposed. however, 
the conditions of labour confront the academic as the property of the university 
and rather than being a public good, the labour process is now subordinated to 
capital. second, under the  real subsumption of academic labour, structural changes 
take place in the organisation of academic work and in the relationship between 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 9 
the academic and the university. in an increasingly competitive sector, developing 
academic labour as a social activity requires: performance management; the moni toring of academic labour through learning analytics, student satisfaction scores and 
research assessments; organisational restructuring and outsourcing; internationali sation and open education strategies; and so on. as the university is incorporated 
inside the circuits of value production, circulation and accumulation, academic work 
is driven by production for exchange rather than use. as a result, each facet of aca demic labour becomes a commodity, governed by a cultural turn towards personali sation and choice, underpinned by student and institutional debt and amplified by 
narratives of entrepreneurialism.

this change to the content and form of academic labour emerges in relationship 
to the secular crisis. in overcoming crises, clarke (1994) argued that capital needs to 
create the conditions for renewed surplus value production through the control of 
labour power and the means of production in appropriate proportions. thus, labour 
productivity and the ability to get educational commodities to market more effi ciently, or turning those commodities over in the market more quickly, are critical 
(lapavitsas 2010). for marx (2004: 645) these responses turn on the capability and 
capacity of businesses to produce relative surplus value:

the production of absolute surplus-value turns exclusively upon the length 
of the working-day; the production of relative surplus-value, revolutionises 
out and out the technical processes of labour and the composition of soci ety. it therefore presupposes a specific mode, the capitalist mode of production, a mode which, along with its methods, means and conditions, arises 
and develops itself spontaneously on the foundation afforded by the formal 
subjection of labour to capital. in the course of this development, the formal 
subjection is replaced by the real subjection of labour to capital.

inside the university, the transition from the formal to the real subsumption of aca demic labour ensures that the collective work of the classroom is disciplined across 
a global system of production (jappe 2014). disciplining academic time is critical in 
this process because the individual value of educational commodities and the price 

hall: the university and the secular crisis10
at which they can be exchanged is determined by the average labour time required to 
produce them. where an educational innovation has not been generally introduced, 
a competitive advantage emerges for the innovating university or educational pro vider over universities or providers deploying less efficient forces of production. the 
time in which profit can be maximised for the innovator depends upon how quickly 
it takes for that innovation to be generalised across the economy or a sector, or for 
the innovation to be overtaken by a more productive technology (postone 1996). as 
a result, speed is critical in creating new educational commodities and in circulating 
them, both in order to recover the costs of innovation and in generating surplus 
value, material wealth and profitability (wendling 2009).

this drive for productivity has ramifications for universities that are recalibrated 
as competing businesses, because profit, or the capacity to generate surpluses that 
can be reinvested in labour or capital-intensity, becomes a motive force. by creating 
an he market, competition between providers for surplus value compels intensi fication of the social forces of production. in effect the amount of fixed capital or 
technology set to work by each academic labourer rises and there is a reduction in 
labour costs because more work is done by machines (basu and vasudevan 2011; 
clarke 1994). this is a rising organic composition of capital. however, as laboursaving processes or technologies are deployed, the amount of academic labour that 
can be exploited is reduced (wendling 2009) and both the accumulation of value and 
the rate of profit fall. as marx noted:

[capital's] surplus value rises, but in an ever smaller relation to the development of the productive force. thus the more developed capital already is, 
the more surplus labour it has created, the more terribly it must develop the 
productive force in order to realize itself in only smaller proportion, i.e. to 
add surplus value . . . the self-realization of capital becomes more difficult to 
the extent that it has already been realized (marx 1993: 340-1).

for universities forced to compete as businesses, this process creates a desperate 
search for new educational markets and technological innovation. it also leads to 
the attrition of established academic labour rights and global arbitrage. across the 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 11 
economy this tends towards a systemic crisis as surplus value has to be extracted 
from less living labour and because there are limits to the existing outlets for prof itable investment (carchedi and roberts 2013). thus, he reforms need to be seen 
as responses to: decreasing levels of profitability; increasing global consumption; 
and making previously marginal sectors of the economy explicitly productive. such 
reforms are the systemic revolutionising of the means and relations of production 
in previously public spheres of the economy, in order to maintain a global system of 
power over the life of the university.

value and the life of the university
this issue of power over the autonomy of individual universities was critical for 
cleaver (2000: 151-3), who noted that value materially affects the relationships 
between students, teachers and administrators. the historical and material forms of 
these educational relationships are mediations that enable a re-composition of the 
relation between capital and labour. such mediation is witnessed in the monitoring 
of academics by students in satisfaction ratings and in the disciplining of students by 
academics through assessment and the use of learning analytics. it is also revealed in 
attendance monitoring of students by administrators and in the performance monitoring of academics. cleaver (2000: 152) argues that refusing such forms of media tion in education would `represent a major breakdown in capital's control over the 
creation of new labour-power'. however, this raises questions of how any `growing 
power of students and teachers can be organized so that it is directed more against 
capital than each other' and thereby underpin `a general breakdown in the ability 
of higher education to discipline, plan and organize the supply of labour' (cleaver 
2000: 153). in the united states, this crisis in the mediation of the law of value inside 
educational contexts underscores `the current attempt by capital to reimpose work 
discipline in the schools through the fiscal crisis and the nation-wide restructuring 
of education' (cleaver 2000: 153).

thus in grappling with mediation in the production of value, the transnational 
relationships between students and staff as academic labourers might be drawn out, 
alongside the relationships between academics and those who labour in other sectors 

hall: the university and the secular crisis12
of the global economy. as a result, the relationship between the law of value and the 
university might be used to reimagine working class composition and solidarity and 
to drive beyond `bourgeois ideologies of social contract, pluralism and democracy' 
(cleaver 1993: n. pag.). however, in the face of the secular crisis and the real sub sumption of academic labour, this requires those who labour inside the university 
to recognise their relationship to capitalism as `a social order based on domination, 
i.e., on the imposition of set of social rules through which, tendentially, all of life is 
organized' (cleaver 1993: n. pag.) and more explicitly to global class antagonism.

this antagonism emerges immanent to the secular crisis and the systemic inability to reassert historical rates of growth. the symptoms of this are seen in: falling 
global productivity in spite of increased hours of labour; the historic collapse in real 
wages; the rise in precarious employment, under-employment and unemployment, 
especially amongst young people; the increases in private debt; and falling levels of 
consumption. here robinson's (1996) nine theses on global capitalism provide a 
critical framework for any pedagogic response by the he sector to the secular crisis 
and its impact on the idea of the university. robinson frames his theses around the 
transnational circuits of capitalist production and the annihilation of unproductive 
spaces. this global nature of production, circulation and accumulation is witnessed 
in the social power of transnational elites, which emerges through intellectual property law and is enshrined in agreements like the transatlantic trade and investment 
partnership (ttip). such agreements are enforced through transnational bodies 
like the international monetary fund and the world bank (2011), with control over 
national educational policy and practice reinforced by philanthrocapitalist organisations like the gates foundation (2014) and the national endowment for democracy 
(ned 2014). the result is the real subsumption of academic labour to the market.

robinson (1996) goes on to argue that this form of global capitalism is pro foundly anti-democratic and this is reflected in the emergence of the free educa tion arms of movements like occupy and #copsoffcampus and of labour movements 
against offshoring. these social movements carry the pedagogic practices of the 
university into other social forms, in order to push back against the dramatic growth 
of socio-economic inequalities. this is then extended into the range of global student 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 13 
campaigns against debt and indentured study. for robinson, there are deep and 
interwoven gender, ethnic and racial dimensions to this escalating global poverty 
and inequality. here it is possible to argue that open education has become a means 
of commodity-dumping by businesses from the global north to the global south in 
order to overcome issues of weak demand in domestic market and overproduction. 
the same open education strategies also enable the extraction of those with tradable 
skills in the opposite direction (hall 2015; world bank 2011).

however, the intensity of the restructuring of public education and the idea of 
the university also affects the ability of academics in the global north to lead an 
analysis and counter-narrative around socio-environmental crises. thus, the triple 
crunch of austerity, climate change and access to cheap, liquid fuel has received 
limited attention. yet there are indigenous communities in the global south fight ing for energy and climate justice, with whom pedagogical alliances could be made 
(bauwens and iacomella 2012). such alliances are important given robinson's final 
thesis, that much of the left world-wide is split between reformists or keynesians 
and those advocating revolutionary change. this is witnessed in divergent responses 
to the student occupation movement and in the calls of academic trade unions and 
student unions for a better capitalism or a capitalism that works.

the re-combination of these nine theses creates a globalised terrain upon which 
universities now exist as competing capitals, subject to the law of value and open 
to global forms of class antagonism. this process of re-combination then mediates 
the relationship between the university and its staff/students, for example through:

*  driving efficiencies in service-provision, for example through outsourcing, 

privatisation or cloud-based services;

*  responding to indentured/debt-fuelled student life and expectations, 

linked to personalisation, employability and entrepreneurial identity;

*  competing internationally either through traditional mechanisms like  

overseas campus provision, or through virtual, technocratic innovation;

*  enforcing mobility and flexibility as a means of leveraging surplus value 

from employees;

hall: the university and the secular crisis14

*  engaging with high-risk, financialised growth strategies, for example  

medium/high yield bonds;

*  connecting to the research and development imperatives of globalised 

capital for securing new terrains for accumulation, including data mining 
or makerspace-type research;

*  reskilling global labour as a commodified workforce through  

employability strategies that are underwritten by concepts like badges 
and digital literacy; and

*  underwriting the jurisdictional imperatives of globalised capital by  

suppressing academic dissent, or investing in security/policing functions.

through the focus on mobility, flexibility and employability and the recalibration of 
student life through debt, collective action is confronted and marginalised by a focus 
on personal aspiration and choice as an entrepreneurial activity. as a result, the university becomes a node in a global productive infrastructure with a concentration of 
services, knowledge, finance and technology in the global north and of productive 
labour in the global south. as robinson (1996) notes, this concentration underpins 
a dominant global culture that co-opts, coerces and reshapes cultural institutions, 
group identities and mass consciousness. this is the brutal reality of a systemic crisis 
of capitalism and the idea that there is no alternative to the law of value as the organising principle for social life.

the politics of there is no he alternative
this process of cultural domination extends to the idea of what the university 
might be for and in laying the groundwork for competition between educational 
providers. whilst there has been no higher education act of parliament under the 
current uk government, there has been a white paper, ministerial pamphlets like 
robbins revisited  (willetts 2013) and those of the her majesty's opposition like 
robbins rebooted (byrne 2014) and statements from university leaders (universi ties uk 2011), which have sought to position the role of the university. such statements have created a narrative that ties universities to economic imperatives and 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 15 
interventionism that are: `system-immanent, the embodiment of self-defense . . .  
wherein bourgeois ideology and the dialectic of bourgeois society are so deeply 
interwoven' (adorno 1968: 9).

thus, the current uk government has framed its he funding changes in terms 
of the maintenance of a specific form of society, lest the public's appetite for mar ketised solutions disintegrates:

without radical changes to how universities were financed however it was 
going to be difficult to change their behaviour. now there is an opportunity 
to use our funding changes to push a real cultural change back towards 
teaching. (willetts 2013: 47)

here, the relationship between the student and both  the state and the idea of the 
publicly-funded university is mediated by narratives that normalise entrepreneurial 
educational activity. this normalisation is then used to reassert the hegemony of 
economic growth and the value of capitalist work in defining the purpose of educa tion. thus, funding changes underscore a belief that there is no alternative to the 
financialisation of the university, or to the individual's role as competing, indentured 
entrepreneur. this is then amplified by the declarations of transnational bodies that 
themselves mediate the relationship between the state and the university, like the 
world bank:

education is fundamental to development and growth.  access to educa tion, which is a basic human right enshrined in the universal declaration 
of human rights and the united nations convention on the rights of the 
child,  is also a strategic development investment . the human mind makes 
possible all other development achievements, from health advances and 
agricultural innovation to infrastructure construction and private sector 
growth. for developing countries to reap these benefits fully--both by learning from the stock of global ideas and through innovation--they need to 
unleash the potential of the human mind. and there is no better tool for 
doing so than education. (world bank 2011: 1; emphasis added)

hall: the university and the secular crisis16
as human rights and the economic future of families are tied to strategic develop ment investment through policy frameworks and structural adjustment, the labour 
pools available for privatised knowledge, innovation and enterprise are strengthened.

this focus on education as a positional good is then extended by a view that 
those goods might be exchanged and consumed in a more efficient, financialised 
market context, in which there are winners and losers:

european universities are being affected in many different ways during the 
current economic crisis - with winners and losers already emerging and the 
differences set to be multiplied over the coming years depending on how 
the winners use their comparative advantage and how the losers can best 
mitigate the effects of cuts through so-called efficiency savings or by raising 
new sources of income. (europaeum 2012: 1)

the proletarianisation of the university is a central outcome of the recalibration of 
he inside national export and industrial strategies (byrne 2014). the acceptance of a 
competitive dynamic in previously public sectors of the economy ensures that lowskilled, low value-added, routine jobs become normalised. moreover, the incorpora tion of he inside the logic of competition is driven by precarious forms of labour 
and casualisation (casa 2014; 3cosas 2014) and the struggle over value. here davies' 
(2014) work on neoliberalism enables us to analyse capitalist work inside academia 
in light of self-exploiting entrepreneurial activity that:

*  enacts new combinations of technologies and practices to inject novelty 

into the circuits of capitalism;

*  operates through counter-acting norms that can never be stabilised;

*  generates productivity in relation to power: first in expanding the  

time-scale for returns; second in expanding the arena for competition; and

*  is grounded in vision and desire.

critically, this means that universities are increasingly restructured as busi nesses through organisational development, knowledge transfer, impact metrics, 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 17 
 technological innovation and so on (gartner 2013). thus, a culture of entrepreneurialism and a discourse of competition that reframes the purpose of the university and 
its funding, regulation and governance, underwrites the explicit value of education 
to the wider economy:

expenditure on training is associated with increased labour productivity at 
the enterprise level. purchases of goods and/or services from the education 
sector (comprising schools and further and higher education institutions) 
increases labour productivity at the sector level, total factor productivity at 
both the sector and enterprise level and the ratio of exports to output at the 
sector level. exposure to spillovers from education purchases is negatively 
correlated with labour productivity but positively and significantly corre lated with all the other performance variables. (department for business 
innovation and skills [dbis] 2014: 15)

here, the idea that there are potential spillovers from productive investment in education underpins the financialised restructuring of he. the state's response to the 
secular crisis has been to generate a narrative for educational policy and practice that 
is rooted in the disciplining of the academic labour of both staff and students. there 
is no choice for the academic/student/worker but to labour as a form of coercion 
and to upskill as an entrepreneur as a form of coercive practice. the focus on the productive value of he and on the denial of alternative forms of funding, regulation and 
governance, illustrates the ways in which the university mediates the disciplinary 
response of capital towards labour in the secular crisis.

the university and the secular crisis
winn (2014b) argues that academic practice inside the university is increasingly kettled by performativity:

in our performativity, teachers are enacting and gradually embodying what, 
in the end, amounts to capital's compulsive and relentless drive to increase 
"surplus labour time", over and above "necessary labour time"; that which 
marx described technically as "exploitation". (winn 2014b: 4)

hall: the university and the secular crisis18
as we saw above, capital acts globally to drive down the average time it takes to produce a specific educational commodity and to secure for itself the available surplus 
time and labour. however, individual universities also innovate as businesses to gain 
competitive advantage by securing larger surpluses relative to their competitors. 
these processes drive performativity throughout the university, both for academics 
as fetishised intellectual producers  and for students as entrepreneurs or partners. 
the pedagogic relationships between academics, students and administrators are 
thus conditioned by the internalisation of capital's need for productivity. as a result, 
the widespread outbursts against, for example, the increase in student fees in the uk 
are limited in scope to ideas about free education, with solutions focused upon how 
the price of education should be met. only on the margins do outbursts of dissent 
form ruptures that coalesce into discussions of a potential post-capitalist transition.

meanwhile, through secondary legislation the recalibration of he continues 
through financialisation, commodification and competition. financialisation pivots 
around the generation of student debt and in discussions around the value of that 
debt in derivatives markets that monetise data about courses, attainment, future 
earnings and employability profiles (mcgettigan 2013). the commodification of education is then catalysed through access to a wealth of performance data related to 
learning, teaching, assessment and debt that is made open to exploitation by managerial classes and finance capital (bain and company 2012; willetts 2013). this is 
amplified through internationalisation strategies that include the growth of moocs, 
which are mechanisms for universities and corporations to extract rents and profits 
from educational services in a global market (hall 2015). the open market in data 
drives the narrative of the student-as-entrepreneur, who is able to reinvent herself as 
an autonomous wealth creator and it opens-up he for international competitiveness 
and employability. these form counter-measures aimed at lowering the social costs 
of entry to education for work.

for bellamy foster and yates (2014) this process underpins speculation:

as the system continues to seek outlets for its enormous actual and potential 
economic surplus, while at the same time enhancing the wealth of those 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 19 

at the top, it inevitably resorts to financial speculation. the result is what 
summers has recently called "over-financialization," associated with mas sive increases in total (primarily private) debt in relation to national income, 
leading to financial bubbles, one after the other, which inevitably burst. this 
dialectical relation between stagnation and financialization constitutes the 
primary reality defining today's monopoly-finance capital. (bellamy foster 
and yates 2014: n. pag.)

across he, this process catalyses the restructuring of the university as an associa tion of capitals, or a public-private network of transnational corporations which are 
more able to produce, circulate and accumulate value as an association (hall 2014a). 
as bain and company (2012) argue, the university then becomes a key node in the 
circuits of the global economy:

in coming years, more businesses will move beyond cost savings and seize 
opportunities to use exportable services to increase revenues and profits . . . 
exportable services, like design and marketing, will assume a bigger role in 
upgrading low-tech products into premium consumer goods and services . . . 
by using distance-learning technologies to "export" higher education, lead ing universities in the advanced economies can accelerate the training of the 
home-grown specialists the emerging-market economies will need. and by 
"importing" the talent of engineers, managers, physicians and other highly 
skilled professionals from companies in developed markets, businesses in 
the emerging markets will not need to wait a generation before their own 
education systems can produce the skilled workforce they require. (bain and 
company 2012: n. pag.)

in this model, transnational partnerships in technology, finance and education ena ble the commodities of elite universities to become financialised and open to trade 
(mcgettigan 2013; moodys 2014), alongside the unrestricted flow of people and 
knowledge (hancock 2014). this export strategy and the exchange of certification as 
a financial asset, is further enabled through national and transnational frameworks 

hall: the university and the secular crisis20
like the ttip (hm government 2013; world bank 2011). thus, the university as an 
association of capitals becomes a node:

between commercial and money-dealing capital and productive capi tal. those who direct the university for the market are not simply vicechancellors, but include associations of policy makers, private equity 
fundholders, credit rating agencies, technology firms and publishers and, 
indirectly, fee-paying students, who form a deterritorialised network . . .  merchant, credit and finance capital affect the inner workings of education, 
in particular as universities are being reconstructed inside the equivalent 
of joint-stock companies, subject to the coercive logic of competition for 
research grants and student numbers. (hall 2014a: 825)

in the secular crisis, there is increasingly limited autonomy for the academic labourer 
(mcgettigan 2013; winn 2015). as winn argues:

if we conceive teaching and learning as the expenditure of student and 
teacher labour power in the production of the knowledge commodity, we 
begin to recognise that the exchange relation between teacher and student, 
where each consumes the labour power of the other, is a productive relation, 
too and not simply one where knowledge is being distributed to consumers 
in a market for higher education. (winn 2014b: 10)

thus, the idea of the university is repositioned against the systemic need of capital as 
the automatic subject to reproduce itself and to overcome barriers to accumulation 
and expansion (clarke 1994; postone 1996). the current phase of he restructuring 
is an attempt by finance and commercial capital to synchronise the productivity of 
academia with their own circuits, in order to overcome the barriers imposed by the 
secular crisis. this is an uncomfortable symbiosis, as those labouring in he can attest 
(casa 2014), where there appears a persistent scarcity or precarity of jobs in the 
midst of an abundance of demand for educational services.

one critical impact of the secular crisis for those working inside the university 
is the anxiety-inducing economisation of their labour (crawford 2014; hall 2014b).   

hall: the university and the secular crisis 21 
the mechanics of accumulation, technologically-mediated changes in production, 
the role of impact metrics and so on, act as new vectors of control and form an attempt 
to overcome chronic, systemic stagnation. this process underscores the need to dis cipline labour in order to recompose it for value production: `discipline is no longer 
simply an art of distributing bodies, of extracting time from them and accumulat ing it, but of composing forces in order to obtain an efficient machine' (foucault 
1975: 164). discipline is critical in our understanding of how financialisation and 
marketisation work together to equalise the labour and labour-time of academics on 
a global scale. this process underpins national student surveys, international league 
tables and research impact assessments, which seek to reveal the exchange-value of 
products from different universities. these rankings form an attempt to generate a 
transnational equivalence in academic practice that can be monetised.

however, this process of quantifying and generalising academic labour also 
reveals falling rates of accumulation and of the production of relative surplus value. 
the increasing numbers of precariously-employed academics, the move towards online learning as a form of labour arbitrage, the increasing rates of youth unemploy ment across the globe and narratives of permanent reskilling, are all indicative of the 
inability of more and more workers to reproduce themselves by selling their labourpower. increasingly an educated class of workers are unable sell their labour-power at 
the rate they need to pay down their debts, to act as consumers and to eat/clothe/
shelter themselves (i.e. reproduce themselves), assuming they can actually find work 
at all (marx 2004).

this generalised proletarianisation of the university, which is reinforced by the 
organisational and technological innovations that recompose he as a productive, 
business sector, is one key outcome of the secular crisis. as the surplus capital accu mulated transnationally by monopoly finance capital demands spaces for investment 
that enable its reproduction, this means that he becomes subject to the global ten dencies towards immiseration, through student and institutional debt and worsen ing wages and labour rights. the competitive demands for debt, as a claim on future 
work and productivity throughout society, enable new markets for global aggregate 
demand but also underwrite global labour arbitrage. at issue is the tension between 
the university's capacity to contribute to the sustainability of any recovery and its 

hall: the university and the secular crisis22
proletarianisation. as the academic labour of both staff and students and the potential for dissent, are segregated, marginalised, measured and disciplined, can spaces 
be found to push back?

conclusion: what is to be done?
at issue for academics and students is recovering the mechanisms through which 
their labour is co-opted or coerced for valorisation. the reproduction of the capital-labour relation is predicated upon immanent conditions of domination. how 
and where might academic labour contest the idea that he and that the univer sity, must reproduce forms of entrepreneurial activity that assert the hegemony 
of stories of growth and work? can this contestation be done inside the univer sity? is the only possibility to fight for alternatives beyond formal institutions 
and to liberate knowledge, skills, technologies and practices from inside? how 
is it possible:

to re-appropriate ("detonate"), "occupy", these moments of space-time through 
"a new pedagogy of space and time", which can be characterised as the production of critical knowledge in everyday life[?] (amsler and neary 2012: 108)

here, the idea of the secular crisis collides with the realities of hegemonic power over 
the world (holloway 2002). the crisis of the university might usefully be analysed in 
terms of globalised struggles against austerity and socio-environmental despoilation. 
these struggles are pedagogical because they enable a collective questioning and 
reimagining of what is possible and what is required to overcome crises. they are 
also organisational in questioning whether hierarchies can deliver a post-capitalist 
alternative. for holloway (2002) this demands a connection with revolutionary social 
transformation that refuses power and which has as its organising principle and 
pedagogic practice the mutual recognition of a shared humanity. pedagogically and 
organisationally, educational struggles are connected to transnational ruptures in the 
capital-labour relation and in amplifying organisational forms and activities that are 
rooted in the anti-power of social relations.

hall: the university and the secular crisis 23 

however, holloway is also clear that there are risks involved in articulating such 
a revolutionary transformation and these risks apply to any university that seeks an 
exodus from the logic of capitalist social relations:

the argument against this is that the constitutional view isolates the 
[university] from its social environment: it attributes to the [university] an 
autonomy of action that it just does not have. in reality, what the [university] 
does is limited and shaped by the fact that it exists as just one node in a web 
of social relations. crucially, this web of social relations centres on the way 
in which work is organised. the fact that work is organised on a capitalist 
basis means that what the [university] does and can do is limited and shaped 
by the need to maintain the system of capitalist organisation of which it 
is a part. concretely, this means that any [university] that takes significant 
action directed against the interests of capital will find that an economic 
crisis will result and that capital will flee from the [university] territory. (pace 
holloway 2002: 6)

is it possible for the university to remain a symbol of places where mass intellectuality, or knowledge as a socially-productive force, might be consumed, produced and 
contributed (hall 2014a; virno 2001, 2004)? does the university remain a symbol 
of the possibility that we can create sites of opposition and ontological critique, or 
where we can renew histories of denial and revolt and where new stories can be told, 
against states of exception that enclose how and where and why people assemble, 
associate and organise?

at issue in addressing these questions is cleaver's (1993) third thesis on the secular crisis, that of the pedagogical struggle against capitalist work and for subjectivity:

capitalist rules impose the generalized subordination of human life to 
work. whereas all previous class societies have involved the extraction of 
surplus labor, only in capitalism have all human activities been reshaped as 
work, as commodity producing labor processes . . .  antagonism, resistance 

hall: the university and the secular crisis24
and opposition accompany this imposition because this way of organiz ing human life dramatically restricts and confines its development. people 
struggle both against their reduction to "mere worker" and for the elabora tion of new ways of being that escape capitalist limits. (cleaver 1993: n. pag.)

as capitalism's limits are revealed brutally both in the form of a lifetime of indenture and 
in the policing and disciplining of staff/student protest, the articulation of alternative 
educational spaces, either inside the university or as a form of higher learning across 
society, becomes critical. such spaces form different, co-operative ways of organising 
educational encounters and curricula. here winn's (2014a), work on three potential cooperative responses for academic production and governance are important.

1.  conversion: constitute the university on co-operative values and principles.
2.  dissolution: radicalise the university from the inside, starting with the 

relationship between academics and students.
3.  creation: build experiments in higher education outside the financialised 

sector.

these three responses are conditioned by the structural domination of wage labour 
and the reality that any co-operative space has to exist inside the totalising relations 
of production of capitalist society. however, the generation of open educational cooperatives has the potential: to contribute to the globalised, socialised dissemination 
of knowledge; to connect educational spaces that are held in common and in public, 
rather than in private; to focus teaching and learning practices upon critical, political 
pedagogy; and to develop governance structures that ground, critique and dissemi nate the community-building of alternative educational settings (hall 2014a). this 
extends the potential deterritorialisation of the university, so that rather than exist ing as a reified institution built on privatised knowledge, practices and forms, those 
very characteristics can be liberated and dissolved into the fabric of society.

these open co-operative approaches form different ways of knowing the world 
and of developing subjectivity that is based on socialised rather than privatised 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 25 
knowledge. here liberation is a critical moment in refusing the subsumption of academic labour inside the market and in presenting a potentially alternative, social 
logic (robinson 2004). as cleaver (1993) argues, this demands:

[a] politics of alliance against capital . . .  not only to accelerate the circulation 
of struggle from sector to sector of the class, but to do so in such a manner as 
to build a post-capitalist politics of difference without antagonism.

if academics and students are to develop a meaningful, socially-constructed and 
democratic set of alternatives, they need to be placed against-and-beyond the secu lar crisis that is restricting and re-inscribing the very idea of the university. as jappe 
(2014: 7) argues, the capitalist mode of production is reaching its historical limits, 
as globally `the absolute amount of value and therefore of surplus-value, is declining 
precipitously' and this makes the courage to re-imagine what the university might 
be for a critical response to the secular crisis.

thus, a re-focusing on the counter-hegemonic potential of academic labourpower, knowledge, skills and practices for socially-useful work or activity, which lie 
beyond capital's system of value, must emerge from an analysis of the contradictions 
of capitalism:

we really can begin to look the world not as a relationship between what's 
inside and what's outside capitalism, but as the working out of capitalism's 
own internal laws of motion. and that might make it easier to see the uni versalization of capitalism not just as a measure of success but as a source 
of weakness . . . it can only universalize its contradictions, its polarizations 
between rich and poor, exploiters and exploited. its successes are also its 
failures. (meiksins-wood 1997).

the question of whether counter-hegemonic positions can be sustained inside the 
financialised university and within a marketised he sector, or whether alternative, 
social centres are required, is an open one. in developing responses there is a role 

hall: the university and the secular crisis26
for those who labour inside the university in revealing the systemic nature of glo balised capital in co-opting all of human existence for profit-maximisation, growth 
strategies and accumulation. revealing these mechanisms highlights how the family, 
community and workplace are eroded and how social welfare is damaged, leading 
to precarious or vulnerable futures. thus, the connection of academic labour to the 
mechanisms through which austerity reproduces and extends the power of transnational elites may reveal the true class position of global labour, including those 
who regard themselves as the educated middle class. in this, the development of solidarity actions grounded in socially-useful knowing, or mass intellectuality is critical.

from inside the university, those solidarity actions need to situate the university 
against the following:

1.  the rise of transnational capital, using education as a vehicle for an  

integrated global production and financial system. this is the university as 
a pivot for the transnational association of capitals (hall 2014a).
2.  the coalescence of a new class group, or hegemonic fraction at a world 

level of global class structure (robinson 1996). this transnational capitalist 
class is grounded in global markets and circuits of accumulation.
3.  the rise of a transnational state apparatus, underwritten by  

transnational institutions, for example the world bank, the  
international monetary fund, the european central bank, the north 
american free trade association and so on. instruments like the ttip 
enforce structural adjustment programmes and education cannot 
escape this locus of control.
4.  the emergence of new forms of global social inequality (bellamy foster 

and yates 2014).

in this process of revealing, the global processes of labour arbitrage stand against 
the ideal of many educators for democratic pedagogy, learners' rights or emancipa tory praxis (amsler 2014; hoofd 2010; thorburn 2012). thus, a politicising of the 
organising principles of the university is rooted in the connections that can be made 

hall: the university and the secular crisis 27 
between the processes of accumulation which emerge from the secular crisis and the 
alienating realities of labour arbitrage. this includes the ways in which universities 
are co-opted and reinforce the objective conditions of capitalism and act as institu tions of the state in amplifying the agency of transnational finance capital as a new 
form of imperialism (patnaik 2014).

such a refusal of the restructuring of the university hinges on the creation of a 
`direct form of communal manifestations of life carried out in association with others -  
[that] are therefore an expression and confirmation of that social life' (marx 2014). 
such an association explodes the fetishised nature of academic labour (winn 2014b; 
winn 2015) and recognises that higher education as it is dissolved into the fabric of 
society, as a form of knowing, is more critical to overcoming global economic and 
socio-environmental crises than the university as a marketised point of value. it is 
therefore possible that a critical political economy of he as it is proletarianised might 
offer a way of developing an emancipatory critical pedagogy on a global scale. this 
emerges from a demonstration of how the university and its curricula, scholarship 
and relationships are being commodified and restructured for value. such a political 
economy might enable the knowledge, practices and skills produced socially and   
co-operatively inside-and-beyond he to underpin new social relations of production 
as a pedagogic project beyond the market.

such a pedagogic project pushes back against the idea that academic/student/
public might be locked inside a commodified, abstract, time-bound education that is 
itself based on the exchange of money, time, expertise, skills, feedback, peer-review 
and so on. instead it is rooted in humane relationships that are useful and that are 
based on solidarity and sharing. this is a form of bell hooks' (1994) self-actualisation: 
a capacity to live more fully and deeply and to integrate intellectual and emotional 
life. such a humane capacity is also the capability to liberate time for use and solidarity, rather than exchange. here, academic life is not driven by a commodity-valuation 
based on the domination of abstract time. academic life is governed by time that is 
useful for social reproduction, rather than by impact metrics, performance or work load management. such a life is based on personal and social relations that dissolve 
the barriers between work and life and which enable the teacher and the student 

hall: the university and the secular crisis28
to form a pedagogical alliance for the collective, socially-negotiated overcoming of 
capital's power over learning, teaching and the curriculum. this concrete alliance, 
revealed inside-and-against abstract time, is the beginning and end of a pedagogical 
fight for free time. it is a concrete struggle against the abstraction of value creation 
and accumulation and for our potential to be and to become. the question then 
pivots around the ability of academic labour to respond to the secular crisis in ways 
that define subjectivity beyond the hegemonic control of capital.

\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \delta \upsilon  \xi \theta \sigma \phi \psi \phi \omega \sigma  \omega \sigma ff\sigma \phi fi\phi \theta \sigma 

the researcher declares: no support from any organisation for the submitted work; 
no financial relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work in the previous three years. since the acceptance for publication of 
this article, the researcher has become a trustee of the open library of humanities.

\gamma \delta fifl\phi \sigma \xi \theta ffi ffl\theta \sigma \phi \psi \phi \omega \sigma \omega 

the author declares that they have no competing interests.

references
3 cosas campaign 2014 available at  http://3cosascampaign.wordpress.com/ [last 

accessed 2 february 2015].
adorno, t 1968 late capitalism or industrial society?  opening address to the 16th 

german sociological congress. available at http://members.efn.org/~dredmond/
adornosozaddr.pdf [last accessed 2 february 2015].
amsler, s  2014 by ones and twos and tens: pedagogies of possibility for democ ratising higher education.  pedagogy, culture and society,  22(2): 275-294. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14681366.2013.852614
amsler, s and neary, m 2012 occupy: a new pedagogy of space and time? the journal for critical education policy studies, 10(2): 106-38. available at http://www.
jceps.com/pdfs/10-2-03.pdf [last accessed 2 february 2015].
bain and company 2012 a world awash in money. available at  http://www.bain.com/

publications/articles/a-world-awash-in-money.aspx [last accessed 2 february 2015].

hall: the university and the secular crisis 29 
ball, s j 2012  global education inc. new policy networks and the neo-liberal imagi nary. london: routledge.
baran, p a and sweezy, p m 1966 monopoly capital.  new york: monthly review press.
basu, d and vasudevan, r 2011 technology, distribution and the rate of profit in 

the us economy: understanding the current crisis. available at  http://people.
umass.edu/dbasu/basuvasudevancrisis0811.pdf [last accessed 2 february 2015].
bauwens, m  and  iacomella, f  2012 peer-to-peer economy and new civilization 

centered around the sustenance of the commons. in: the commons strategy 
group (ed.) the wealth of the commons: a world beyond market and state. available at http://wealthofthecommons.org/essay/peer-peer-economy-and-new-civilization-centered-around-sustenance-commons [last accessed 2 february 2015].
bellamy foster, j and yates, m d 2014 piketty and the crisis of neoclassical economics. monthly review. available at  http://monthlyreview.org/2014/11/01/pikettyand-the-crisis-of-neoclassical-economics/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
broadbent, b 2012 costly capital and the risk of rare disasters. london: the bank 

of england. available at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
documents/speeches/2012/speech581.pdf [last accessed 2 february 2015].
byrne, l  2014 robbins rebooted: how we earn our way in the second machine 

age. london: social market foundation. available at  http://www.smf.co.uk/
publications/robbins-rebooted-how-we-earn-our-way-in-the-second-machineage/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
campaign for the public university 2014 available at http://publicuniversity.org.

uk/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
carchedi, g and roberts, m 2013 a critique of heinrich's, `crisis theory, the law of the 

tendency of the profit rate to fall and marx's studies in the 1870s'.  monthly review. 
available at  http://monthlyreview.org/commentary/critique-heinrichs-crisis-theorylaw-tendency-profit-rate-fall-marxs-studies-1870s [last accessed 2 february 2015].
casa  2014 a home online for casual, adjunct, sessional staff and their allies in 

australian higher education. available at  http://actualcasuals.wordpress.com/ 
[last accessed 2 february 2015].

hall: the university and the secular crisis30
clarke, s 1994 marx's theory of crisis. basingstoke: macmillan press.
cleaver, h 1993 theses on secular crisis in capitalism. available at http://libcom.org/

library/theses-secular-crisis-capitalism-cleaver [last accessed 2 february 2015].
cleaver, h 2000 reading capital politically. edinburgh: ak press.
crawford, k 2014 the anxieties of big data.  the new inquiry . available at  http://

thenewinquiry.com/essays/the-anxieties-of-big-data/ [last accessed 2 february 
2015].
davies, w 2014  the limits of neoliberalism: authority, sovereignty and the logic of 

competition. london: sage.
dbis  2014 estimating innovation spillovers: an  international sectoral and uk 

enterprise study. london: dbis. available at  https://www.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/384344/bis-14-1269-estimating-innovation-spillovers-an-international-sectoral-and-uk-enterprise-study.pdf
elliott, l and  atkinson, d 2012  going south: why britain will have a third world 

economy by 2014. london: palgrave macmillan.
europaeum 2012 europe's university budgets. available at  http://www.europaeum.org/

files/reports/universities-budgets-report_feb2012.pdf [last accessed 2  february 2015].
foucault, m 1975 discipline and punish: the birth of the prison. london: penguin.
gartner 2013 gartner reveals top predictions for it organizations and users for 2014 

and beyond. available at http://gtnr.it/17rlm2v [last accessed 2 february 2015].
gates foundation 2014 college-ready education, strategy overview. available at 

http://www.gatesfoundation.org/what-we-do/us-program/college-readyeducation [last accessed 2 february 2015]
hall, r 2014a on the abolition of academic labour: the relationship between intel lectual workers and mass intellectuality.  triplec: communication, capitalism & 
critique, 12(2): 822-37. available at http://triple-c.at/index.php/triplec/article/
view/597 [last accessed 2 february 2015].
hall, r 2014b notes on the university as an anxiety machine. available at http://www.

richard-hall.org/2014/07/10/notes-on-the-university-as-anxiety-machine/ [last 
accessed 2 february 2015].

hall: the university and the secular crisis 31 
hall, r 2015 (forthcoming) for a political economy of massive open online courses. 

learning, media and technology . doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17439884. 
2015.1015545
hancock, m  2014 international education strategy. available at  https://www.

gov.uk/government/speeches/international-education-strategy [last accessed 
2 february 2015].
hansen, a h 1955 the stagnation thesis. in: american economic association (ed.) 

readings in fiscal policy. homewood, il: richard d. irwin, inc., pp. 540-57.
harvey, d 2013 a companion to marx's capital: volume 2. london: verso.
hea 2014 students as partners. york: hea. available at  https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/

workstreams-research/themes/students-partners [last accessed 2 february 2015].
hm government  2013 information economy strategy. london: hm government. 

available at  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/206944/13-901-information-economy-strategy.pdf [last 
accessed 2 february 2015].
holloway, j 2002 change the world without taking power. london: pluto press.
hoofd, i m 2010 the accelerated university: activist academic alliances and the simulation of thought.  ephemera: theory and politics in organization,  10(1): 7-24. 
available at http://bit.ly/1ar0o6f [last accessed 2 february 2015].
hooks, b 1994 teaching to trangress: education as the practice of freedom. new york: 

routledge.
jappe, a  2014 towards a history of the critique of value.  capitalism, nature, 

socialism, 25(2): 25-37. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2014.9068
20 [last accessed 2 february 2015].
jimeno, j f, smets, f and yiangou, j 2014 secular stagnation: a view from the eurozone. in: tuelings, c & baldwin, r (eds.)  secular stagnation: facts, causes and 
cures. london: centre for economic policy research press, pp. 153-64.
keynes, j m  1936  the general theory of employment, interest and money . london: 

macmillan.

hall: the university and the secular crisis32
krugman, p  2014 four observations on secular stagnation. in: tuelings, c &   

baldwin, r (eds.)  secular stagnation: facts, causes and cures . london: centre 
for economic policy research press, pp. 61-8.
lapavitsas, c  2010 financialisation and capitalist accumulation: structural 

accounts of the crisis of 2007-9.  research on money and finance , discussion 
paper no 16. available at  http://bit.ly/1l0cdwa. [last accessed 2 february 
2015].
magdoff, h  and  sweezy, p m  1987  stagnation and the financial explosion .  

new york: monthly review press.
marx, k 1993 grundrisse: outline of the critique of political economy. london: penguin.
marx, k 2004 capital, volume 1: a critique of political economy. london: penguin.
marx, k  2014 private property and communism.  economic and philosophical 

manuscripts of 1844 . available at  https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1844/manuscripts/comm.htm [last accessed 2 february 2015].
mcgettigan, a 2013 the great university gamble: money, markets and the future of 

higher education. london: pluto press.
meiksins-wood, e  1997 back to marx.  monthly review,  49(2): 1-9. doi:  http://

dx.doi.org/10.14452/mr-049-02-1997-06_1
moodys 2014 outlook update: us higher education: negative outlook for us 

higher education continues even as green shoots of stability emerge. available 
at http://bit.ly/1mhreyh [last accessed 2 february 2015].
ned 2014 available at http://www.ned.org/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
patnaik, p  2014 capitalism, inequality and globalization: thomas piketty's `capi tal in the twenty-first century.  international development economic associ ates. available at http://ideaswebsite.org [last accessed 2 february 2015].
postone, m 1996  time, labor and social domination: a reinterpretation of marx's 

critical theory. cambridge: cambridge university press.
robinson, w i 1996 nine theses on global capitalism. race and class, 38(2): 13-31.
robinson, w i 2004 a theory of global capitalism: production, class and state in a 

transnational world. baltimore, ma: john hopkins university press. doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/030639689603800202

hall: the university and the secular crisis 33 
rubin, i i 1972 essays on marx's theory of value. detroit: black and red.
schumpeter, j a 1975 capitalism, socialism and democracy. new york: harper.
schwartz, l-g  2012 0%.  and/or evacuate . available at  http://occupyeverything.

org/2012/zero-percent/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
summers, l  2014 reflections on the `new secular stagnation hypothesis'.   

in: tuelings, c & baldwin, r (eds.)  secular stagnation: facts, causes and cures . 
london: centre for economic policy research press, pp. 27-38.
thorburn, e 2012 actually existing autonomy and the brave new world of higher 

education.  occupied studies . available at  http://bit.ly/xzcpro [last accessed 
2 february 2015].
universities uk 2011 efficiency and effectiveness in higher education: a report by the 

universities uk efficiency and modernisation task group. london: universities uk. 
available at http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/documents/2011/
efficiencyinhighereducation.pdf [last accessed 2 february 2015].
virno, p 2001 general intellect. available at  http://www.generation-online.org/p/

fpvirno10.htm [last accessed 2 february 2015].
virno, p 2004 a grammar of the multitude. los angeles, ca: semiotext(e).
wendling, a e  2009  karl marx on technology and alienation . london: palgrave 

macmillan. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/9780230233997
willetts, d 2013 robbins revisited: bigger and better higher education. london: 

social market foundation. available at  http://www.smf.co.uk/research/ 
category-two/robbins-revisited/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
willetts, d  2014 contribution of uk universities to national and local economic 

growth. department for business, innovation and skills. available at  https://
www.gov.uk/government/speeches/contribution-of-uk-universities-to-nationaland-local-economic-growth [last accessed 2 february 2015].
winn, j 2014a is the worker co-operative form suitable for a university? (part 3). available at  http://josswinn.org/2014/04/is-the-worker-co-operative-form-suitablefor-a-university-part-3/ [last accessed 2 february 2015].
winn, j 2014b writing about academic labour.  workplace, 25: 1-15. available at 

http://bit.ly/1fz6xik [last accessed 2 february 2015].

2
stereoscopic feature-making is really just getting into effective stride . . . 
britain has been a pioneer in this medium . . . the technical excellence of 
british stereoscopic photography has already been proved in a number of 
shorts and featurettes. (kinematograph weekly 1953a: 29)

between 1951 and 1955, british stereoscopic production company stereo tech niques produced around twenty short 3d films and one feature (see  table 1 ). 
these films included `the first 3d travelogue, the first ballet film, the first ani mated cartoon, the first sports film, the first newsreel, the first 3d advertising 
film, and so on' (smith 1993); they played to full theatres and broke box-office 
records when they were shown across britain, and were successfully distributed 
and exhibited across europe, including screenings in amsterdam, berlin, brussels, 
copenhagen, and paris, and several cities in the united states. with an apparently 
solid financial, aesthetic and technological reputation, these films - and stereo 
techniques, the company that made and distributed them - might be expected to 
represent a key moment in 3d history. yet they remain a largely unknown element 
within the history of stereoscopic 3d, overshadowed by the american features that 
dominated the mid-1950s.1

this article, then, is in part an attempt to redress that balance and, in con junction with other recent work on these films and time period (easen 2003; 
johnston 2011, 2012, 2015), it seeks to offer a historical and critical reappraisal 
of their content and production history. to aid this attempt at reclamation, the 
article will also critically appraise a series of 3d histories and overviews that have 
elided or provided specific historic stories about the british 3d experiments. as 
such, the article is an exercise in both historiography and historiophoty, consid ering the `processes of condensation, displacement, symbolisation, and quali fication' (white 1988, 1194) found in two filmed documentaries  the queen in 
3d  (channel 4, 2009) and  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \delta  \pi \sigma \upsilon \xi \phi \psi \omega fffifl ffiffl\theta \theta \phi  i j\xi ffl\phi `\delta ' (sky 3d, 2012) 

 1  the absence of the british films from historical overviews of 3d mirrors the absence of the european 

and russian experiments that preceded them.

 3 
film key personnel  format production company / 

sponsor / client
1951

now is the time (to 

put on your glasses)

norman mclaren (d)
john halas, raymond 
 spottiswoode (p, s)

colour british film institute

national film board of 
canada
a solid  explanation peter bradford (d)

raymond spottiswoode (p, s)

b&w british film institute

pathe' documentary 
unit/associated britishpathe' (ab-pathe')
around and around norman mclaren (d)

john halas,  
raymond spottiswoode (p, s)

colour british film institute

national film board of 
canada
distant thames / 

royal river2

brian smith (d)
raymond spottiswoode (p, s)

colour british film institute

international realist
1952
sunshine miners jack d. chambers (d)

charles w. smith (s)
raymond spottiswoode (p, s)

b&w stereo techniques

data film unit
national coal board
northern towers roy harris (d)

charles w. smith (s)  
raymond spottiswoode (p)

b&w stereo techniques

shell film unit

around and about
1: port of liverpool
2: square dancing 
in hammersmith

danny carter (d)
christine bruce (p)
charles w. smith (s)

b&w stereo techniques

christine bruce 
 productions

the black swan leonard reeve (d)

jack ralph (ap)
raymond spottiswoode (p)

b&w stereo techniques

anglo-scottish

(contd.)

4
film key personnel  format production company / 

sponsor / client
1952

eye on the ball peter bradford (d) b&w stereo techniques

pathe' documentary unit 
/ ab-pathe'
\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi  \sigma \upsilon \phi \psi \omega ff raymond spottiswoode (p) b&w stereo techniques

unknown (possibly a 
 commercial  film)
1953
air junction / 
airport

b&w stereo techniques

anglo-scottish
the owl and the 

pussycat

john halas / brian borthwick (d)
digby turpin (s)

colour stereo techniques

halas & bachelor
summer island robert angell (d)

charles w. smith (s)

colour stereo techniques

film partnership / 
madeira wine ltd.
vintage `28 robert angell (d)

jack ralph (ap)
godfrey jennison (s)

b&w stereo techniques

film partnership

fifl\delta \delta ffi\pi fflff\lambda \xi \pi  \lambda \xi  i\psi \upsilon \lambda \xi 

/ festival in spain

unknown b&w stereo techniques

unknown
london tribute robert angell (d)

jack ralph (ap)
raymond spottiswoode (p)
ken nyman

b&w stereo techniques

unknown (presence of 
ralph and angell could 
suggest film partnership)
royal review robert angell (d)

arthur wooster (c)
charles w. smith (s)

colour stereo techniques

ab-pathe'

 5 
film key personnel  format production company / 

sponsor / client
1953

the real thing ralph thomas (d)

j. henry piperno (p)
charles w. smith (s)

colour stereo techniques

tp production / john 
haddon advertising 
agency / capstan 
 cigarettes  (client)
1954
\gamma \delta \theta \lambda  \xi \pi  \sigma \upsilon \phi  \psi \omega ff\sigma fi\delta \theta  charles w. smith (s) colour stereo techniques

theatre publicity ltd.
thomas french & sons 
(client: curtain company)
fl\phi ffiffiffl\lambda \lambda ij \psi fflff\theta 

flakes

unknown colour stereo techniques

kellogg company
the diamond / the 

diamond wizard

montgomery tully / dennis 
o'keefe
raymond spottiswoode (ap)
charles w. smith (s)

b&w stereo techniques

gibraltar films ltd.

1955
power in perspective alan pendy (d)

gl weinbren (d)
raymond spottiswoode (p)

colour stereo techniques

shell film unit

table 1:  stereo techniques: list of films and production partners (d: director;   

p: producer; ap: associate producer; c: cinematographer; s: stereographer).3

  2  distant thames (1951) was the title of the film when it debuted (incomplete) at the festival of britain 

in may 1951. a completed version of the film, now entitled  royal river (1951) and featuring final 
images of london during the festival of britain, debuted at the edinburgh film festival in august 
1951.
 3  the information in this table is drawn from a variety of sources, including the credits of the individual 

films (where available), hayes (1989), smith (1987, 1993), the british film institute database, and 
primary reports in kine weekly and the times. many of these sources overlap and there are occasionally disagreements (there is little or no information on  `'^*_* ,ssaeoeo/ae [1952] or oeo/''*!ae*_* *_ "oess*_
(1952), for example). however, the table remains an attempt to offer the fullest record possible of 
stereo techniques' activity in the 1950s.

6
and three written sources hal morgan and daniel symmes'  amazing 3d  (1982),  
r.m. hayes' \gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi  \psi  \omega \pi \upsilon ff\lambda fifl ffiffli j\pi `'\lambda ^fiffi*_fl \lambda * ,ff\sigma fi\sigma \lambda \upsilon ss\lambda *\pi ss ae\pi ffl\sigma 'ffi (1989) 
and ray zone's  ,ff\sigma fi\sigma \lambda \upsilon ss\lambda *\pi ss ae\pi ffl\sigma 'ffi ffiffli ff_\sigma  oefi\pi ^\pi ffl\upsilon  \lambda * \gamma \delta  j\pi `' (2007). while a 
fuller list of stereoscopic films can be seen in table 1, these aforementioned five 
sources reveal the creation of two similar limited stories about the british 3d 
pioneers and their place within the broader sweep of stereoscopic 3d history: stories that the article will challenge by developing and presenting alternative archival evidence from a range of primary sources designed to give a more rounded 
account of the 1950s british 3d.

while the focus of the article necessarily falls on the engineers, producers, 
and filmmakers involved in these british experiments, it is not a study of the 
specific stereoscopic technologies, patents or camera rigs created. that is not 
to reduce the importance of the different mechanical set-ups that were created 
and designed by these individuals but it allows the article to bypass issues of 
mechanical patents and theoretical equations in favour of a closer examination 
of the absence of these men (and they are all men) and this company from film   
history. that absence occurs across different categories within media studies: 
british media history has little or no mention of british 3d innovation; techno logical media histories focus on 3d as a recurring (american) failure obsessed 
with gimmickry; while recent discussions of digital 3d media pass over analogue  
3d film as if it were the black sheep of the family, anathema to the continued success of the current digital stereoscopic boom.23

the elision of the british pioneers can, in part, be linked to stereo techniques' 
choice of production material. short films, often documentary or artistic in nature, 
were chosen as subjects rather than a feature-film project: the status of the feature vs.  
the short film in film studies more generally already reduces the focus on such 
work. yet such explanations reveal only one facet of this absence. while the british 
film industry has successfully promoted its technical abilities in camerawork, spe cial effects, and production design, technological skill has rarely featured in british 
cinema studies; equally, while 3d may have claimed to expand realism, its popular 

 7 
and scholarly reputation is based more around visual breaches of the z-axis, exploit ing negative parallax to project objects `out' of the screen and into the audience. 
this sense of 3d technology offering spectacular attractions has clashed with the 
preferred reputation of british cinema as social realist and restrained. to borrow a 
famous phrase from british cinema history, stereoscopic 3d has arguably been seen 
as containing too much tinsel, and not enough realism.

britain's absence from stereoscopic 3d history can also partially be explained 
by the reluctance of the academy and popular discourse to take 3d seriously as a 
historical topic and contemporary fact within current media industries. although 
significant academic work has recently considered the place of digital 3d in film 
production, exhibition and aesthetics (acland 2010; elsaesser 2012; higgins 2012; 
purse 2013; ross 2015; tryon 2012), little historical work has been done that chal lenges or opens up the dominant narrative about analogue 3d's recurrent failures. 
by focusing on the elision of the british 3d pioneers' attempts to popularise stereo scopic filmmaking in the early 1950s, this article challenges the broader absence of 
historical work around the different global 3d experiments of the twentieth century. 
as a counterpoint to that tradition, this article's reconstruction of stereo techniques 
allows it to explore the role of technology in british cinema studies, the place of 
innovators such as those who founded stereo techniques, what it means to study a 
company judged to have `failed,' the lack of international perspectives on the devel opment of 3d outside america, and the problem of (re)assessing british film history 
in the face of two dominant narratives: existing 3d history and the versions of history 
modern british media tells about its past. 

british 3d history in media and popular sources

the meaning of the past . . . cannot be gathered by looking at the past as it 
is in  itself but only looking at the past as it has been written about or talked 
about by somebody . . . what we call the past is a story of fables to which 
people, for some obscure reason or other, have given their assent. (munz 
1997: 854-5)

8
in november 2009 the british broadcaster channel four devoted part of its schedule 
to a series of programmes about stereoscopic 3d. alongside 3d films as diverse as 
flesh for frankenstein (1973) and hannah montana: best of both worlds (2008) was a 
two-part documentary, the queen in 3d (2009). specially commissioned for this season, it purported to reveal a hitherto unknown piece of british cultural and cinematic 
history: a lost 3d film of the queen's 1953 coronation called  royal review (1953).4 
alongside a broad overview of the royal family and post-war british society, the 
programme offered a particular representation of britain's 1950s experiment with 
stereoscopic film production. three years later, british pay-per-view channel sky 3d 
revisited the same film and era in `royal visits,' the second part of trevor mcdonald's  
\gamma \delta \theta \theta \lambda  \xi \lambda \pi  \sigma \upsilon \delta \lambda \phi \psi \omega  (bskyb 2012). both documentaries present subtly different sto ries about this period in history, about the technology under discussion, and the 
place of british inventors and filmmakers in the larger scheme of 3d history. as this 
section will reveal, the stories being told offer alternative versions of the history of 
the british pioneers, with notable elisions and stresses that work to define public 
perception of 1950s british 3d.

central to the narrative of the first of the two-part channel 4 documentary is 
british 3d film  royal review  (1953). clips from several other british 3d films are 
shown in the second part, notably  sunshine miners ,  northern towers, around and 
about,  eye on the ball ,  air junction  and  summer island . the emphasis here, then, 
is on the documentary-led films that purport to show an aspect of british society: 
even when a clip from stereo techniques' 1952 ballet adaptation  the black swan  
appears, it is used to emphasise the place of ballet and leisure in british society, 
rather than the film's stereoscopic aesthetic and use of depth cues to create a 3d 
ballet. throughout, these british 3d films are not seen as charles w. smith's `world's 
firsts' but are depicted as naive and misguided; this is not a revolution in screen 
technology but a minor blip on the road to the important american 3d features. 
the programme also vastly reduces the role of original pioneers such as raymond 

 4  the season also contained  derren brown presents the 3d magic spectacular , 10 greatest 3d movies , 

the greatest ever 3d moments , friday the thirteenth part iii  (1983), special channel four idents in   
3d, 3d sponsorship tags and 3d advertisements.

 9 
and nigel spottiswoode, and of stereo techniques. the opening voiceover reveals 
the programme's preferred focus on `two young men . . . experimenting with a revolutionary new technology,' namely two surviving filmmakers, director robert / bob 
angell (director of summer island, vintage `28, london tribute and royal review) and 
cameraman arthur wooster (who worked on  royal review). while television docu mentary filming tends to focus on interviews, preferably those that have been spe cially filmed for the programme, the absence of alternate voices or stronger archival 
work helps shape the version of history the programme chooses to depict.

in place of technological innovation by talented engineers and filmmakers, the 
programme reverts to a tired stereotype of the british boffin. the programme shows 
angell and wooster messing around in a cluttered garage / shed, with talk of lash ing two cameras together in order to film the coronation and other royal events.   
the result suggests  royal review  was accidental, slapdash, a heath robinson-or 
wallace and gromit-style narrative of blind optimism and bodge jobs rather than 
a professionally planned and executed production overseen by smith. here, british 
cinema is reduced to less than a cottage industry, while the american 3d features, 
the only real point of comparison, are slick and competent: equally, while stereo 
techniques is elided, american studios are feted. according to a 1993 interview with 
smith, royal review was stereo techniques' most well-equipped shoot, featuring a 
revised version of a camera produced for the festival of britain (known as the bfi 
camera), a second, new, assembly of twin newman-sinclair cameras that was pre pared by pathe', and the stereo techniques' `spacemaster,' its new twin cameflex rig 
specially built in hollywood (smith 1993). this set-up allowed stereo techniques to 
have three fixed viewpoints along the coronation route, and at other locations in the 
weeks following: evidence the company took a professional approach to such film ing, not the slapdash option suggested by the documentary.

aside from issues of personnel and technology, the programme depicts the 
british film institute through standard archive imagery: rusted, battered film cans, 
light flickering out of a 35mm projector, vast shelves of metal film canisters stretch ing into the distance. while this can be read as a reductive view of the bfi or the 
national film and television archive, it clearly contrasts the old (analogue, linear) 

10
with the new (digital, non-linear): a comparison made concrete when the programme 
voiceover asserts `for half a century the results of their experiment were buried in 
these film canisters . . . when researchers opened these cans they were astonished to 
see footage of the queen from 1953 in colour and 3d. it was one of the film finds 
of the century.' this notion of discovering rare antiquities, of presenting a film that 
is `part of a treasure trove of 3d newsreels recently unearthed deep in the vaults,' is 
inaccurate. any claim of showing royal review `for the first time' on television would 
likely belong to the 1980s, when 3d clips were shown on television programmes 
highlighting the return of 3d to cinema in the early part of that decade; while the 
film was screened in 3d at a 1980s german film festival and at the 3d expo in los 
angeles in the early 2000s (johnston 2013). therefore, the film was hardly `buried' in 
film canisters or the source of astonishment. 

describing the films as newsreels is also an inaccurate labelling, since only two 
of stereo techniques' films fit that broad definition. as noted in  table 1, the films 
span multiple formats and genres. while the programme later adjusts this claim of 
newsreel filming, referring to angell and wooster as `documentary filmmakers' who 
wanted `to harness the power of 3d to bring viewers face to face with the everyday 
wonders of modern britain,' it once again elides the central role of spottiswoode, 
smith and stereo techniques by claiming the films represent how britain `looked to 
bob and arthur.' while bob angell did direct several of the 1953 films, he was not 
involved in  a solid explanation, royal river, sunshine miners, northern towers, the 
black swan or eye on the ball, which feature in the programme: a prominent example 
of a linear history simplifying and focusing on an individual's role. as will be dis cussed below, angell and wooster were not the driving forces on either the management or creative side of the british 3d business that actually produced these films.

while i am reluctant to get into an argument over the `correct' way to read history, 
the queen in 3d does make an attempt to reintroduce the british 3d experiments to 
a broader audience; and bob angell briefly mentions how he was part of an inexpe rienced and `newly formed documentary company.' in comparison, `royal visit,' epi sode two of the sky 3d documentary series  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \delta  \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \xi \psi \sigma \omega fffifl ffiffl\theta \theta \psi  \sigma \psi ff i\xi ffl\psi j\delta `, 
reduces this linear narrative even further, while being reliant on similar claims and 

 11 
interviews. royal review remains the focus; there is little mention of london tribute, 
stereo techniques' second 3d newsreel, of queen mary's funeral; it highlights `two 
young cameramen' who were `experimenting with a new technique' using `a homemade rig' with `a great deal of luck'; new interviews with angell and wooster are foregrounded; and the films are described as `forgotten about for almost sixty years.' the 
programme revisits almost every beat of the first part of  the queen in 3d: the main 
difference is the treatment of the bfi. here, it is depicted in light of a new high-tech 
archive facility in warwickshire which will `preserve millions of moments of time . . . 
the best versions of what really matters.' that last comment, given the `best version' 
of history the programme is constructing, is particularly telling: while jan faull talks 
about the bfi's involvement in funding the initial four telekinema 3d films, she is 
not given an opportunity to correct the mis-representation of 3d history taking place 
elsewhere in the programme.

both programmes restrict the historical narrative that can be built around 
stereo techniques to one film of the coronation and the associated documentaryled projects:  the queen in 3d  makes no reference to the animated mclaren films,   
or the halas and bachelor animation  the owl and the pussycat , which fall outside 
the borders of its linear and limited focus on a `lost british culture of the 1950s.' 
the insistence on british 3d as naive young men playing with technology ignores 
the industrial role that stereo techniques played. it was not content to simply pro duce the same documentary material and work with the same documentary companies, hoping to break into more mainstream work: a test at ealing studios using the 
company's newman-sinclair camera-rig was described as `quite outstanding,' while 
a similar colour test of the new cameflex spacemaster rig at abpc elstree (shot by 
director of photography irwin hillier) was considered `an outstanding piece of work' 
(cricks 1952: 31). 

the narrative that  the queen in 3d  and  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \delta  \pi \sigma \upsilon \xi \phi \psi \omega fffifl ffiffl\theta \theta \phi  i j\xi ffl\phi `\delta '
construct between british 3d and the documentary movement may be partial, and 
may lack historical rigour, but it offers a more positive and informed depiction 
than other popular historical sources. one of the first book-length studies of 3d 
(morgan and symmes 1982) attempted to revise the wider lack of historical work 

12
on the technology through a cross-media approach that explores the place of 3d in 
popular culture, including victorian stereography, domestic photographic cameras, 
hollywood films, comics, and magazines. when it introduces a standard 1950s 3d 
narrative by discussing the  bwana devil  (1953)  premiere, the book makes the fol lowing note:

though 3d films were by no means new to hollywood - pete smith's 
audioskopics had been quite popular in the 1930s - they had been missing 
in action since the start of world war ii. the european success of the dutch 
short queen juliana in 1948, and of the spottiswood [sic] brothers' shorts 
for the 1951 festival of britain received little attention from the american 
industry. (morgan and symmes 1982: 54)

apart from a 3d film chronology in the appendices (which lists nine stereo tech niques shorts) this is the sole reference to the british experiments. as is clear from 
the excerpt, the sidelining of `european' 3d can be broadly taken for all non-us 3d, 
given that the german and russian 3d films of the 1930s and 1940s are also sum marily dismissed. despite the international development and application of 3d, the 
book positions the cinematic technology as almost exclusively american in nature. 
this elision is not restricted to morgan and symmes: it can also be found in other 
publications of the early 1980s, when 3d films had returned to cinemas: special editions of popular fan magazines such as  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \theta \sigma \pi \upsilon \sigma \delta \phi \psi \lambda  (1983) and  starlog  (1982) 
offer encapsulations of 3d history that jump from russian lenticular 3d of the 1940s 
to bwana devil and house of wax (1953), and offer a limited filmography that, again, 
stresses feature production over short film. the dominance of the feature in both 
popular and academic film writing works to reduce the importance of the british 
films, even as the stress on american 3d reduces the complexity of the international 
history of the technology.

the more rigorous survey of stereoscopic cinema found in r.m. hayes' 3d his tory and filmography (1989) gives more time to the european experiments, not ing the french, german and hungarian work, and commenting that `the british 

 13 
contributions to stereo-vision movies have too long been overlooked' (hayes 1989: 
19). hayes does not tackle that oversight and, although it contains a more compre hensive listing of the british films to date, the book gives no real sense of the history 
behind the british pioneers or their films: it remains an awareness of the absence, 
not an attempt to fill it. more recently, ray zone's work can be read as a counter and 
deepening of both 1980s books' view of history, describing `four general periods' 
of stereographic history: novelty (1838-1952), convergence (1952-85), immersive 
(1986-2007) and digital (2005-present) (zone 2007: 1-4). his book focuses on the 
first category and develops a historical narrative that is alert to the international 
nature of the technology. zone's discussion of stereo techniques, however, is a brief 
note that the 1951 shorts `marked the end of the novelty period of stereoscopic 
 cinema . . . with the stereographic animation of norman mclaren, there was no question that 3d motion pictures had at last achieved the status of art' (zone, 2007: 179).  
aside from the problematic assumption that all of the stereo techniques' 3d films 
can be dismissed as `novelty' - an assertion based solely on the 1951 festival of britain 
films - zone reduces the complexity of the british experiments to a claim for artistry 
through stereoscopic animation, again ignoring the history of stereo techniques and 
the contributions of individuals such as spottiswoode or smith. 

all three books, then, reinforce a historical narrative that dismisses the british 
work and success, creating a history of absence, oversight and reduction. as brannigan 
has noted in relation to the history of colour technology, many historical narratives 
ignore complexity in favour of linearity and notions of evolution, `located in a point: 
a decisive event, the genius of an individual, a revolutionary invention' (brannigan 
1986: 125). it is clear that in these three written 3d histories (and other popular articles) that event remained the american production and release of the feature bwana 
devil, and its director arch oboler. given both american and british 3d processes built 
on the work of professor john t. rule's stereography research (zone 2007: 170-71),  
oboler was no more the inventor of a completely new stereoscopic process than 
the spottiswoode brothers were. yet oboler's film is the decisive point identified in 
these histories, the first act of the 3d boom narrative. despite the expansive scope of 
these books, american 3d features dominate the history created, a simple linearity 

14
that smoothes over the complexities of 3d history and reinforces the idea that 3d 
has a 30 year cycle of returning to the mainstream: a narrative that ignores the role 
of 3d in other national contexts in the 1930s, russia in the 1940s, american genre 
films of the 1960s, soft-core pornography in the 1970s, and theme park rides of 
the 1980s and 1990s. equally, the popular picture of 3d history becomes intrinsi cally linked to other historical `stories': the rise of television, the decline of cinema 
audiences, and the introduction of other screen technologies such as cinerama and 
cinemascope. 3d's apparent `failure' of the 1950s is easily linked to more outra geous gimmicks such as aromarama, smell-o-vision, hypno-vision et al., further 
reducing any potency that stereoscopic technology might attain. it remains a novelty, 
never a necessary technological step forward for cinema's artistry.

throughout all of the historical narratives constructed in these media and 
popular sources, then, the place of the british pioneers is elided, misunderstood, or 
partially represented. in comparison with the written sources,  the queen in 3d  and 
\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \delta  \pi \sigma \upsilon \xi \phi \psi \omega fffifl ffiffl\theta \theta \phi  i j\xi ffl\phi `\delta ' at least offer a reassessment and expansion of 

knowledge around these early experiments. however, as the next section will dem onstrate, that reassessment is open to challenge based on a closer examination of 
varied historical documents such as the contemporary trade press, the films them selves, and interviews with now-deceased filmmakers. 

the british 3d pioneers: a revised history

in britain we are sometimes backward in boasting about our achievements. 
so let us say here quite bluntly that the british invented 3d, the stereoscopic 
movies we know today. (smith 1987: 26)

raymond spottiswoode. nigel spottiswoode. charles w. smith. jack ralph. ken 
nyman. these five names, and stereo techniques, the company they established, 
were the key players in british 3d in the 1950s. largely absent from existing 3d histories, they are equally absent from histories of british cinema of the 1950s, despite 
the first films debuting in 1951, a `pivotal year for british society, marking a shift from 
a period of post-war austerity . . . to the consumer boom of the 50s . . . [and] a turning 

 15 
point for the film industry in general' with the x certificate, an influx of european art 
cinema, and competition from television (cook 1986: 355). the stereo techniques 
3d films exist on the cusp of that change, harking back to the world of the sponsored 
commercial documentary ( sunshine miners, northern towers, power in perspective ) 
and traditional views of england (the thames in  royal river, football and cricket in 
eye on the ball ), while also looking forward to the rise of the teenager (dancing in 
hammersmith palais in  around and about ), greater female independence ( the real 
thing, royal review), and a technological future (northern towers). 

the films' stereoscopic documentary depictions of 1950s british society repre sent one important part of stereo techniques' business model: the development of 
sponsored documentaries that, to adapt john grierson's phrase, explored the stereoscopic treatment of actuality. alongside this model, however, were attempts to use 3d 
artistically in both animation and live action, experiments with commercial usage in 
adverts for capstan cigarettes and kellogg's cornflakes, and a move into drama with 
a drama-documentary short and 1954 feature. as demonstrated above, the historical 
narratives constructed around britain's first 3d production house elide the complexity of their productions in favour of the easier, linear connection to the social-realist 
documentary heritage of the british film industry. through this section, a range of 
primary and secondary sources are used to construct an alternative story around 
these 3d pioneers that explores the set-up, intention and eventual fate of stereo 
techniques. these materials include primary publications such as  kinematograph 
\gamma \delta \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi  \sigma \upsilon \delta \phi \lambda  \psi \omega ff\delta fi\phi \pi  fl\omega ffifflij\delta `'\delta j\pi  ^\omega `*ffl _ ^'iff\upsilon  and the edinburgh film festival 

materials held by the national library of scotland, and secondary sources such as a 
bectu interview with, and a series of articles by, charles w. smith, one of the 1950s 
stereoscopic pioneers. these latter materials provide an additional perspective that 
contributes to a broader picture of the past even if such reminiscences are `widely 
influenced by their personal interests and abstractions' (munz 1997: 854) and as 
open to challenge as the interviews with angell and wooster criticised above.5 

 5  for many years, smith was a lone voice in british 3d history, publishing articles in technical journals 

through the 1970s, 80s and 90s that stressed the role of the 1950s innovators and their relationship 

16
assembling its own story from these archival sources (including the films themselves) allows this article to reflect on the issues inherent in such construction 
(not least the gaps that remain in the historical record), and its departure from the 
broader overviews discussed above. it is the contention of this article that this alter native narrative is a necessary step to challenge and understand the stories found 
in those programmes, which presented british 3d as a shambolic, quaint and naive 
cottage industry subsumed by america and forgotten by history. while that reclamation and revision has begun elsewhere, notably around exhibition (johnston 2011) 
and the aesthetics of 3d landscape (johnston 2015), this article's focus remains on 
the personal and industrial context of british stereoscopic filmmaking: the men who 
helped set the 1950s 3d boom rolling, the companies they established, and the films 
they produced. while these materials are dominated by men, it is not the intention 
of the article to replace the existing partial narratives with a `great man' theory of 
history, but to suggest ways in which these historical sources necessarily complicate 
the linear histories that exist.

to begin this alternative history, raymond spottiswoode (1913-1971) was handpicked by the british film institute to lead the production of special films for the 
purpose-built telekinema at the 1951 festival of britain. spottiswoode, an oxford 
graduate who had worked as a reader for mgm in hollywood, became technical head 
of the national film board of canada in the early 1940s, also directing films such as 
guards of the north (1941) and high over the borders (1942). lured back to britain for 
the festival, spottiswoode recruited his engineer and mathematician brother nigel 
(who had been experimenting with 3d photography) to produce the necessary theo retical equations and mechanical knowledge to produce a series of short stereoscopic 
films (smith 1993). working with stereoscopic enthusiast lesley dudley, and different 
production companies (see  table 1 ), spottiswoode was able to present a series of 
stereoscopic and stereophonic films at the south bank telekinema. the success of the 
first four stereoscopic films included sold-out performances at both the festival of 

to the american-dominated 3d industry that followed. while smith's recollections are as partial as 
the other sources considered here, his effort in keeping british 3d visible should be noted.

 17 
britain and the 1951 edinburgh film festival, and this encouraged the spottiswoodes 
to distribute these films more widely and pursue more stereoscopic productions. 
as they had experienced difficulties working with dudley, who publicly disputed 
the spottiswoodes' decisions and approach to 3d, the brothers established stereo 
techniques limited in association with jack ralph. another ex-national film board of 
canada producer, who was also associated with documentary company anglo-scottish, 
ralph had been appointed by the bfi to oversee `all festival film arrangements' (eason 
2003: 52), and brought a range of industry contacts to stereo techniques.

raymond spottiswoode worked as the main stereo consultant on the early 
films, supervising each shoot, controlling `the depth content of each scene, in dis cussion with the director . . . and [setting] the stereoscopic adjustments of the camera' (smith 1993). 6 while working on  sunshine miners in 1952 he met charles w. 
smith (1921-2004), the assistant to director of photography wolfgang suschitzky. 
spottiswoode, impressed with smith's work and eagerness for the process, offered 
him a job: after extensive training in `the theories of image formation and the use 
of the stereoscopic adjustments on the camera,' smith became stereo techniques' 
main stereo consultant (smith 1993). with smith and others, the spottiswoode 
brothers developed several camera rigs during stereo techniques' tenure: the   
bfi camera rig was developed with lesley dudley, and revised in late 1951; there 
was a technicolor rig built for  royal river ; and a twin 35mm cameflex rig built 
for the coronation filming that became  royal review . this latter rig (intended 
to be more lightweight and portable for location shooting) was constructed in 
hollywood and overseen by smith, after raymond spottiswoode was injured in a 
car accident (foster). spottiswoode also received a grant from the national research 
development corporation (nrdc) to produce a special 3d camera, the spacemaster, 
that was used to film the diamond wizard (1954) and power in perspective (1955) in 
britain, and then the mask (1960), a warner 3d film produced in canada (on which 
smith was stereoscopic advisor).

 6  although he remained a director of the company, nigel was not active in production, being more 

interested in the technical and theoretical side of stereoscopy.

18
stereo techniques was a small but effective business, driven by a simple model. 
it would provide stereoscopic equipment and expertise, and would develop short 
projects of five to fifteen minutes' duration alongside existing production compa nies. from the start, this included a wide range of artistic and documentary pro jects: the national film board of canada was co-producer on the norman mclaren 
films now is the time (to put on your glasses)  and around and around,7 described as 
`the first work of art for the stereoscopic cinema' (smith 1993); associated-british 
pathe' / pathe' documentary unit co-produced  a solid explanation, eye on the ball  
and royal review; while  the black swan  and  air junction  were co-productions with 
anglo-scottish. within this arrangement, stereo techniques used their technologi cal knowledge to retain final approval on all shorts, `to ensure that the stereoscopic 
content would be satisfactory' (smith 1993). crucial to the success of the venture was 
the creation of a nascent 3d distribution and exhibition network: from small begin nings at special events in london and edinburgh in 1951, stereo techniques installed 
and trained projectionists in over 30 public cinemas from liverpool and brighton to 
cambridge and southampton (for more on the stereo techniques exhibition net work, see johnston 2011). the company's intent appears to have been vertical inte gration, an approach that could be seen as an early precursor to an organisation such 
as the imax corporation, whose `monumental documentary . . . films feed the core of 
the business, which is leasing and maintaining the technological infrastructure itself' 
(acland 1998: 431-2). whereas imax's documentary approach (which expanded to 
include 3d documentary) was initially designed to serve its traditional sites in museums or institutions, stereo techniques tested their films and technological product 
in the existing exhibition sector, with differing results.

given its expertise in screen installation, projectionist training, projector syn chronisation, and distribution of prints within britain and across europe, stereo 
techniques has to be understood as more than just a production house. yet its 

 7  nfb and mclaren produced other stereoscopic shorts  \gamma  \delta \theta \lambda \theta \xi \theta \pi  (1952) and twirligig (1952), apparently without any additional input from stereo techniques.

 19 
success within the historical record rests on three elements: the artistic and techni cal quality of the films it made; the financial success of the films and company; and 
(perhaps most problematically) the impact stereo techniques had on the future success of 1950s 3d in america. as the opening epigram from  kinematograph weekly 
suggests, the british 3d short films had displayed `technical excellence' (kine weekly 
1953a: 29), while their aesthetic content had been hailed for the attempt to enhance 
realism (and restrict the usage of negative parallax) yet criticised for not embracing 
the world of the feature film and presenting star images (johnston 2012). financially, 
the company followed a `conservative, very british . . . nothing too ambitious' policy 
(smith 1993), but tended to make its money back on the films:  the black swan, for 
example, which adapted a short sequence from  swan lake featuring ballerina beryl 
grey, recouped its production costs in nine months (brunel 1953: 230). although 
aiming at a vertically integrated model, stereo techniques was reliant on a distri bution and exhibition approach that required a programme of four to five short 
films to be packaged together, meaning that the initial outlay (although shared with 
partners) was higher. ironically, the initial success of the american feature films   
(notably  bwana devil  and  house of wax ) led to several stereo techniques films 
being shown on a much wider theatrical circuit before the main feature.  the real 
thing (1953), a stereoscopic commercial produced by stereo techniques for capstan 
cigarettes, benefited from this wider exposure and several critics commented it was 
better than the film it preceded (johnston 2012).

the relationship between stereo techniques and the subsequent american 
revival of 3d is more uncertain but also historically disingenuous. hayes (1989) and 
zone (2007) disagree on this point: hayes sees the distribution of 3-dimension (1952), 
a compilation of stereo techniques films by sol lesser, as a key indicator that some 
influence can be claimed, notably on arch oboler but also upon the other hollywood 
directors and producers who chased the 3d boom. zone, challenging that, notes 
the development of american 3d systems through the 1940s and the early years of 
1951, rather than any outside influence (zone 2007: 178). both agree that the term 
`3d' appears to come from raymond spottiswoode, who was looking for an easy way 

20
to say `three' or `third dimension' when discussing the films; that the october 1952 
spottiswoode and smith article on the `basic principles of the three-dimensional film' 
(published in the  journal of the society of motion picture and television engineers 8) 
offered the strongest theorisation of the process yet; and that spottiswoode was 
elected a fellow of smpte for his work in stereoscopic theory and production, serving 
as a member of the american smpte committee on stereo motion pictures (zone 
2007: 178). beyond this, there is little agreement or historical evidence to suggest a 
direct relationship. spottiswoode himself noted that `american producers had "played 
3d for a fast buck"' by focusing on gimmick over content, and suggested that a similar 
error was avoided in britain `by exercise of a peculiarly english trait: the producers 
showed no interest whatever in any new techniques' (kine weekly 1953b: 7).

the search for influence or specific temporal relationship highlights the same 
fallacy as brannigan encountered when researching colour film history: separate narratives (the british experience and the more widely known american experience) are 
simplified, collapsed and condensed into a linear narrative that ignores complexity 
and difference in favour of a cause-and-effect narrative about `1950s 3d.' as this article has argued, through stereo techniques the british 3d pioneers established and 
promulgated a successful (albeit small scale) stereoscopic production, distribution 
and exhibition network across britain, and made inroads into europe and the united 
states. to see this as relevant only in terms of its impact on  bwana devil  and the 
other us productions is to ignore the importance of that moment for debates around 
national media and the wider global development of stereoscopic media technology.

of course, the alternative historical narrative of stereo techniques that has been 
briefly sketched out through this section is also partial and condensed, based on those 
research materials but lacking others. access to the financial or company records of 
stereo techniques, or precise box office returns, for example, would confirm the 
status of the company, more fully flesh out the roles played by ralph or nyman, and 
reduce the need to rely on smith's recollections of the time period (his memory may 

 8  the article was also given the 1952 smpte journal award for paper of the year - according to smith, 

the first time this award had been given to a non-american paper (smith 1993).

 21 
be as partial as that of angell and wooster). the fate of stereo techniques is also open 
to speculation: the company's final film appears to be  power in perspective (1955), a 
co-production with shell film unit, but there is no extant print of the film and paper 
records from the period make no reference to it. raymond spottiswoode's post-3d 
career included more industrial documentaries, producing forming of metals (1957) 
with the shell film unit / film centre and  business goes by jet  (1963) with film 
centre / dehavilland, among others. as noted above, charles w. smith continued to 
work in 3d production over the next four decades, and was an avid promoter of its 
aesthetic and technological possibilities. even given the scant knowledge available 
on the creation and ultimate fate of stereo techniques and its owners, it remains 
clear that the historical narrative that can be constructed from the range of sources 
utilised here is more rich, complex and multi-faceted than that allowed for in the 
standard written and visual histories. as such, this alternative narrative opens up 
stereo techniques and british 3d as topics worthy of further study.

conclusion

the past is real enough. but the stories we tell about it are constructions . . . 
no amount of looking at the past can tell us whether we should pursue 
explanation or interpretation, or both (munz 1997: 867)

in pre-2010 film history, stereoscopic 3d rated as little more than a brief note, a 
cautionary tale of a 1950s technological false start, a step too far down the industrial 
novelty route that was overtaken by the wider screens of cinemascope rather than 
the stereoscopically `deeper' ones offered by  house of wax and kiss me kate (1953). 
reduced to a legend built around thirty-year cycles of failure, analogue 3d is now (in 
the light of digital 3d success and apparent longevity) ripe for fuller rediscovery and 
expansion. daniel symmes has noted that the current american-based 3d industry 
initially appeared eager to distance itself from its analogue history, wary of being 
tarred by association (symmes 2010). the recent release of 3d blu-rays of 1950s   
3d films such as dial m for murder (1954) and \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \delta \theta  \sigma \delta \upsilon \phi  \xi \psi \theta  \omega ff\lambda fifl ffi\lambda ffl\upsilon \upsilon i (1953) 
suggests that strategy may be shifting. 

22
the presence of a revitalised industrialised (and commercialised) interest in the 
american features of the 1950s is, however, only one step in any revisitation of 3d 
history and this article has argued that any concerted attempt to reassess 3d his tory must, of necessity, move beyond the traditional american examples. while some 
academics have made inroads here, piecing apart earlier examples from victorian 
stereoscopy, or the national contexts of german or russian stereoscopy, the british 
pioneers remain a strong and under-explored part of that richer tapestry of 3d his tory. in the space of four years, stereo techniques produced between 20 and 25 short 
films, and one feature, that were seen around the world; the founders offered new 
approaches to existing formats and genres, arguably across a wider range than the 
features that followed; the documentary films that were produced attempted to balance competing issues of social realism and visual spectacle; and, as engineers, they 
designed and developed the most advanced 3d cameras of the period. while the 
article has remained conscious of overemphasising the contribution of one company 
within the wider scope of 3d history (and ignoring other experimenters of the period 
such as british filmmaker leslie dudley), it has underlined the importance of understanding the specificity (and complexity) over the desire for a broad master narrative.

histories of technology have to be conscious that technology itself `is not neu tral or spontaneous but is a product of social and economic circumstances and only 
secondarily of great men' (brannigan 1986: 128). while this article has been guilty of 
focusing on a series of men, that in no way denies that the circumstances underpin ning the development of british 3d were rooted in post-war britain and the desire of 
the festival of britain to project a new vision of britain to itself and the world. what this 
article has demonstrated, however, is that broadening out the current conceptions of 
analogue 3d history (american, novelty-based, cycle of thirty-year failures) will involve 
closer examination of such individuals, companies, camera rigs, national contexts and 
finished films, through primary and archival research that can reclaim these currently 
hidden or absent pioneers. only by embracing the complexity of analogue 3d history 
can the opportunities offered by digital 3d be fully understood and developed.

competing interests
the author declares that they have no competing interests.

 23 
refernces
acland, c r  1998 imax technology and the tourist gaze.  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \delta \xi \pi \theta  \sigma \lambda \delta \upsilon \phi \psi \omega ff 12(3): 

429-445.
acland, c r 2010 avatar as technological tentpole. flow, 22 january 2010. available 

at http://flowtv.org/2010/01/avatar-as-technological-tentpole-charles-r-aclandconcordia-university/ [last accessed 8 march 2012].
branigan, e  1986 color and cinema: problems in the writing of history. in:   

kerr, p (ed.)  the hollywood film industry . london: routledge & kegan paul,   
pp. 120-47.
brunel, c 1953 3d in england films in review, 4(5): 228-31.
cinefantastique 1983 13, 6/14, 1 (september).
clarke, g  1953 test pilot for british 3d.  kinematograph weekly , 24 september,   

p. 33.
cook, p  1986 mandy: daughter of transition. in: barr, c (ed.)  all our yesterdays:  

fifl ffi\psi \pi \xi \omega  ffli j\xi \phi \lambda \phi \omega ` \gamma \phi '\psi ^\pi . london: bfi, pp. 355-61. pmid: 2426203.
cricks, r h  1952 studios face impact of aspects.  kinematograph weekly ,  

15  september, p. 31.
eason, s 2003 film and the festival of britain. in: sinyard, n (ed.)  j\xi \phi \lambda \phi \omega ` \gamma \phi '\psi ^\pi  ffli

\lambda `\psi  *fi_fl\omega * , \gamma \psi \theta \psi ss\xi \pi \lambda \phi ffl'. manchester: manchester university press, pp. 51-63.
elsaesser, t 2012 the `return' of 3d: on some of the logics and genealogies of the 

image in the twenty-first century.  \gamma \xi \phi \lambda \phi ae\pi \theta  oe'o/\delta \phi \xi aeff 39(2): 217-46. doi:  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1086/668523
foster, j l  n.d. a three dimensional life: charles w. smith fbks frps. available 

at:  http://www.stereoscopy.com/3dlegends/charlessmith.html [last accessed   
8 march 2012].
hayes, r m  1989  oeo/ ffl!\phi \psi \omega * , "\phi \omega \lambda ffl\xi ae \pi '\upsilon  #\phi \theta ^ffl$\xi \pi %`ae ffli \sigma \lambda \psi \xi \psi ffl\omega aeffl%\phi ae \gamma \phi '\psi ^\pi . 

 jefferson, nc: mcfarland & company.
higgins, s  2012 3d in depth:  \gamma ffl\xi \pi \theta \phi '\psi ff "\delta $ffl and a sustainable aesthetic.  film 

 history, 24(3): 196-209.
johnston, k m 2011 `now is the time (to put on your glasses)': 3d film exhibition in 

britain, 1951-55. film history, 23(1): 93-103. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.2979/
filmhistory.23.1.93

24
johnston, k m  2012 a technician's dream? the critical reception of 3d films 

in britain.  historical journal of film, radio and television,  32(2): 245-65. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01439685.2012.669887
johnston, k m  2013 pop-out footballers, pop concerts and popular films: the 

past, present and future of 3d tv.  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \xi \theta \upsilon \xi \phi  \psi \omega \xi  ff\theta fi\xi \pi \theta flfiffi\delta \theta flffl i\delta j\pi \theta flffl \delta `
research into new media technologies,  19(4): 438-45. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1354856513494176
johnston, k m  2015 `an unlimited field for experiment': britain's stereoscopic 

 landscapes. in: newland, p (ed.)  british rural landscapes on film . manchester: 
manchester university press.
kine weekly 1953a four question marks. kinematograph weekly, 24 september, p. 29.
kine weekly 1953b new vision expert tells bks: trade out of its depth.  kinematograph weekly, 15 october, p. 7.
morgan, h and symmes, d 1982 amazing 3d. boston: little, brown & co.
munz, p 1997 the historical narrative. in: bentley, m (ed.)  \gamma \delta '^fl\theta ffi\delta \theta  fi\delta  *ffi_fi\delta \pi ffi\delta \sigma -

raphy. london: routledge, pp. 851-72.
purse, l 2013  *ffi\sigma ffififlffl ff'fl\sigma ffi\theta \sigma  ffi\theta  ,\delta ^jfflfl\pi  \gamma ffi\theta \xi 'fl. edinburgh: edinburgh university 

press.
ross, m 2015 3d cinema: optical illusions and tactile experiences. london: palgrave 

macmillan. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/9781137378576
smith, c w 1987 3d. the british foundations. eyepiece: journal of the guild of  british 

\gamma fl'\xi \pi fl \psi \xi \upsilon \omega \theta ffi\upsilon ffifl\theta _ss 8(1): 26-30.
smith, c w 1993 bectu oral history project, tape 271.
starlog 1982 fantastic 3d photo guidebook. new york: starlog press.
symmes, d 2010 personal interview with author.
the queen in 3d 2009 channel 4 (16 & 17 november 2009).
trevor macdonald's queen and country 2012 sky 3d (9 july 2012).
tryon, c 2012 after avatar: 3d, cinematic revolution and digital projection. available 

at:  http://www.chutry.wordherders.net/wp/?p=3366 [last accessed 14 april 
2012].
introduction
all language use builds on previous instances of what becker (1995) calls `languaging'; therefore all talk is implicitly connected to the voices of past experiences. one 
way for speakers to negotiate the history of their talk is by using the resource often 
referred to as reported speech. reported speech, while not necessarily an exact 
repetition of a previous speaker's words, is used by speakers to explicitly assign 
responsibility for portions of their talk to prior voices. goffman's (1981) approach 
to participation, discussed in more detail below, has laid the groundwork for many 
studies investigating this tangle of voices in spoken discourse (e.g. goodwin & 
goodwin, 2004; hill & zepeda, 1992; irvine, 1996; levinson, 1988). few studies, 
however, focus on the ways that reported speech and participation function in rapidly changing computer-mediated conversational environments. 

in this study, we describe the dialectic relationship between the evolution of the 
interface of the microblogging platform twitter and the extant practices and needs 
of its user base regarding reported speech. in 2009, the designers of twitter added 
a new feature to the medium to accommodate the user-created manual practice of 
sharing prior text from other twitter users, most often using the notation `rt' to indicate that the material was being `retweeted.' this interface change allowed tweeters 
to more easily share others' tweets with their own followers through the simple click 
of a button, with minimal imposition of the user's own voice on the prior text. we 
focus here on this change to the twitter interface and its impact on the practice of 
sharing prior texts on this platform, attending to the ways in which users incorporate 
the new feature into their extant practices and how this allows them to negotiate the 
interplay of voices and the assignment of responsibility in ways that are particular 
to twitter. 

we begin with an introduction to twitter as a platform of communication to 
situate the analysis in context. following this introduction, we provide background 
information on reported speech, a phenomenon that is commonplace on twitter 
using the retweet functions. murthy (2012: 1067) notes that twitter audiences often 
attribute retweeted material to the user sharing the prior tweet, despite clear ref erence to the original tweeter. in the second section, we explore such conflicts of 

  3 

ownership and authorship between the retweeter and original tweeter using the 
goffmanian participation framework, updating it for a new medium with new rules 
and constraints. the case of retweeting illustrates the dialectic between the prac tices of users and designer-implemented interface modification. to illustrate, in the 
third section, we describe user practices as they have been affected by the change in 
modal affordances, resulting in two forms of retweeting that each perform different 
interactional work in terms of displaying alignment through participation structures 
and attribution. we find that this situation has resulted in the coexistence of two 
different forms of retweeting, nuanced in their participatory affordances and com plementary in their usage, and we discuss the relationship of these retweet practices 
to participatory concepts such as principalship and authorship. finally, we illustrate 
how the co-existence of these two forms of retweeting has resulted in a comple mentary set of emergent practices. this study thus contributes to a growing body of 
research on participation in social media and the use of reported speech and prior 
texts in interpersonal online interaction.

twitter as a platform of communication
twitter, founded in 2006, represents a mode of social media known as microblogging. micro-blogging, as defined by murthy (2012: 1061), is:

an internet-based service in which (1) users have a public profile in which 
they broadcast short public messages or updates whether they are directed 
to specific user(s) or not, (2) messages become publicly aggregated together 
across users, and (3) users can decide whose messages they wish to receive 
but not necessarily who can receive their messages; this is in distinction 
to most social networks where following each other is bi-directional (i.e., 
mutual). 

twitter users are often referred to as `tweeters,' based on the name of the short messages that they produce, `tweets.' an individual user's tweets appear in a collected 
feed on his or her `homepage,' which other users can visit to see all recent tweets 
produced by the user. when one user decides that she wants to see messages from 

 4
another tweeter regularly, she can `follow' that user's account, resulting in this sec ond user's tweets being displayed in the first user's `timeline,' which presents tweets 
from all the tweeters that she has followed in reverse chronological order. as noted 
by murthy, this act of following does not require reciprocity; user a can follow user 
b without any need for user b to follow user a in return. this can result in a unidirectional spread of information, with user a receiving the messages that user b 
posts without user b ever seeing anything posted by user a.

`retweeting,' an iconic characteristic of twitter, is the practice of reproducing 
another user's tweet on one's own homepage and redistributing that tweet to one's 
own followers. retweeting originated as a user-generated practice to share inform ative, humorous, or creative tweets produced by other tweeters; this practice was 
indicated by the retweeter by manipulating the format of the basic tweet by typ ing the acronym `rt,' usually followed by the original tweeter's username (indicated 
with @username) and then the content of the tweet being shared. retweeting is a 
way of showing engagement on twitter, and discovering what kind of material gets 
retweeted has been one way of increasing engagement on the platform. bongwon 
suh and colleagues (2010) analyzed 74 million tweets to discover which features of 
tweets contribute to `retweetability.' their results indicated that tweets that included 
urls and hashtags were highly retweeted, indicating that content is being shared in 
some relevant way; furthermore, the age of the account and the number of follower 
and followees increased retweetability, indicating that the network of the original 
author is influential in the level of engagement. 

when something is retweeted, what is the role of the author of the tweet, and 
what is the role of the retweeter? who gets the attribution for the tweet? while 
this rt notation was understood by users to indicate that content from another 
user was being shared, the retweeting user could modify the content of the original 
tweet or add more content of his or her own, often resulting in some confusion as to 
which parts of the tweet had been produced by the original tweeter and which had 
been produced by the retweeter. this confusion of authorship and attribution was 
addressed in boyd, golder, and lotan's (2010) study of retweeting, and it also caught 
the attention of the designers of twitter. in 2009, twitter changed its interface to 

  ss

incorporate a tool for retweeting more simply and without alteration of the content 
of the original tweet. this change gave users a new option for sharing material pro duced by others. however, while the new retweet function facilitated rebroadcasting 
of tweeted material, it did not allow retweeters to engage with the content of the 
original tweet, as they could with the older rt form, by adding their own content or 
modifying the original tweet. as a result, two popular forms of retweeting currently 
co-exist: the new retweet function built into the twitter interface and the older, usergenerated retweet convention. we argue that users deploy these two forms to indi cate different relationships to retweeted text.

reported speech and sharing of prior text
while early work on reported speech and prior text largely focuses on the role of 
repetition and attribution, later studies, including tannen's (1986, 2007) research on 
constructed dialogue and johnstone et al.'s (1994) research on intertextual repetition, 
have focused on the ways that so-called reported speech is altered when imported into 
new interactional environments in spoken language. tannen (2007: 112) argues that:

when speech uttered in one context is repeated in another, it is fundamen tally changed even if 'reported' accurately. in many, perhaps most, cases, 
however, material represented as dialogue was never spoken by anyone else 
in a form resembling that constructed, if at all. rather, casting ideas as dia logue rather than statements is a discourse strategy for framing information 
in a way that communicates effectively and creates involvement.

for tannen, analyses of attribution of talk to a previous speaker should center less 
on any possible repetition and more on the new construction, including new frames 
for interpretation of the information that is being presented in the form of dialogue. 
gordon (2006: 546) continues this theme, noting that "prior text is shaped and 
reshaped to create different alignments and identities in different interactions and 
for different audiences".

while we continue the use of the term `reported speech' in this article (due in 
part to the possibility for near-exact repetition in the sharing of previously produced 

 ss
talk on twitter), we note the objections of tannen and others to the idea of reported 
speech as an exact repetition of earlier talk, and we bear in mind the role of creativ ity and new construction in the sharing of prior text on twitter. regardless of its 
faithfulness to the original form, reported speech is viewed here not just as a way of 
reproducing content from another person's talk, but also as a rhetorical device for 
the layering of multiple voices in one's own discourse. the features of twitter allow 
for many options for reproducing the talk produced by others, including fully faith ful, largely modified, and wholly created representations.

participation frameworks in reported speech
much of the interactional work done by participants in dialogue that takes place 
through the use of reported speech centers around the concept of participation. 
in this study, we draw on the framework for participation proposed by goffman 
(1981), in which he elaborated participant roles beyond those of physically uttering 
the words (speakers) and of receiving the acoustic signals of this speech (hearers). 
for goffman, participation status is "the relation of any one such member to [an] 
utterance." of primary of interest in this work are his distinctions for participants in 
production roles: animator, author, and principal: 

animator:  the participant who physically produces the utterance, "the 

sounding box"
author:   the participant who composes the utterance, "the agent who 

scripts the lines"
principal:   the participant responsible for the utterance, "the party to whose 

position the words attest" (goffman, 1981: 226)

by separating out these roles, goffman enables a more useful analysis of the relationship of participants involved in producing the talk than a simple conception of the 
"speaker."

in addition to these traditional roles, draucker (2012) notes that the features 
of twitter have given rise to a divergence in the role of transmitting talk, which, 
for goffman, could be neatly packaged into the animator role. draucker suggests 

  7 

that when considering twitter interaction, it is useful to distinguish between the 
roles of animator, defined as "the person who is physically producing the text," 
and broadcaster, "the followable entity that makes the talk available to recipients." 
she notes that all tweets necessarily have both a broadcaster and an animator, but 
that the two roles need not be filled by the same participant. this distinction can 
often be seen clearly in the talk of organizational twitter accounts, in which the 
organization itself is set up as the broadcasting party that makes the talk available 
to the account's followers (e.g., the pittsburgh steelers american football team for 
the @steelers account), while some (often unknown) individual or group performs 
the actual physical animation of the text for the tweets (most likely through typing, 
but also potentially through voice-to-text software). draucker's definition of the 
broadcaster role is intentionally specific to the features of twitter, but it has applications in other mediums such as television or print, particularly those that allow 
for the animator to be obscured from the audience in some way. we adopt this distinction in transmission of talk in this article and add the broadcaster to goffman's 
traditional production framework, as it is particularly relevant to a discussion of 
reported speech and the sharing of prior text.

in addition to recognizing the possibility for different participants to take up dif ferent roles in their production of talk, it is important to take into account the possibility for multiple participants to perform overlapping roles. bakhtin argues that all talk is 
multi-voiced in some way, drawing on the usage of words and phrases that have gained 
meaning from their prior uses, but he also makes a special designation for "doublevoiced discourse," or the use of "another's speech in another's language" (1981: 324). 
bakhtin argues that this double-voicing imbues words with three types of meaning: the 
direct meaning of the quoted speaker, the meaning created through the current speaker's use of reported speech, and the dialectic meaning created in the interplay between 
the two. similarly, tannen's (2007) argument regarding constructed dialogue asserts 
that the attribution of talk to previous speakers is a rhetorical device, used to enact the 
present speaker's stance towards the talk he or she is supposedly reproducing.

the meaning of reported speech, then, is created not just in the content of the 
words, but in the ways in which speakers layer the multiple voices to which those 

 ss
words can be attributed. besnier (1992, adapted from pascal, 1977: 8) provides the 
following example to illustrate the manipulation of voicing and attribution when 
reporting the talk of others:

a)  she stopped and asked, "is that the car i saw here yesterday?"
b)   she stopped and asked if that was the car she had seen there the day 

before.

in example (a), the speaker is attributing the speech back to the woman represented 
by the pronoun `she,' indicating that the speaker is reporting the speech directly as 
it was uttered by the woman. example (a) employs multiple voices, but the direct 
quotation style is meant to indicate no overlap in production roles - the speaker 
clearly takes on the role of animator, but assigns the author and principal roles to the 
woman he or she is quoting. in example (b), however, the speaker employs indirect 
quotation, allowing for more overlap in the production roles. while the speaker is 
still the sole animator, the authorship of the sentential complement of if is unclear - 
the hearer does not know to what extent the woman or the current speaker has 
authored or is the principal of the final part of the utterance. 

additionally, it is important to differentiate the content of a speaker's utterance 
from metalinguistic ideas such as patterns of preferred usage, responsibility, and 
authorship. norms for reporting speech in a community or medium reflect local 
theories of information, authorship, and meaning (besnier, 1992). our analysis investigates the common practices for twitter users in sharing the prior tweets of other 
users, asking how the available features of the platform influence the forms of sharing and reproducing talk on twitter.

participation and reported speech on the internet
goodwin and goodwin (2004) note that technology is changing the face of partici pation, opening up possibilities for wider participation and communication; con sequently, in attempts to apply traditional concepts of participation frameworks to 
online contexts, goffman's roles no longer neatly apply. in jirotka et al.'s (1991) study 
of an online strategy game, the authors demonstrated that while users design their 

  ss

talk for certain participants, the text-based nature of conversation confused some 
speakers about whether they were viewing a conversation or a series of individual 
announcements. in his work on blogging, myers (2010) notes that the many roles 
held by each individual participant often make it difficult to use goffman's catego ries to separate the intended participants (and participant roles) from the uninten tional roles that users take on. 

to this end, it is important to keep in mind the modal affordances of the medium 
of study. originally introduced by gibson (1977), the term `affordance' is used to refer 
to the potential of an object to allow a user to perform an action. the term has been 
taken up in studies of computer-mediated communication and human-computer 
interaction; it is defined here as "options for interaction that the environment provides 
for the participants residing in it, and especially those options that are acted upon by 
the individual" (o"rnberg berglund, 2009: 187). awareness of the modal affordances 
of the medium allows the analyst to understand the process by which norms manifest 
and become standard practice (cherny, 1995). these standard practices arise out of a 
soup of possibilities afforded by the medium, and their acceptance ultimately depends 
on context and discourse dynamics (androutsopoulos, 2011). for instance, herring 
(2010) argues that even though interactions on the internet could be technically classified as `typing', they are conversational in nature and can be classified like `talk' - as 
such, we use the term `talk' to refer to the conversations and interactions happening 
in an online space, even though the talk is (usually) produced by a keyboard instead 
of the vocal cords. constraints on the actions of users are another aspect of modal 
affordances that must be considered, for example, twitter's limit of 140 characters 
per tweet. this character limit imposed by the medium is one motivation for users 
to shorten word forms, elide words and characters, and modify retweeted material 
to fit under this limit. however, as described by hargittai and walejko (2008), in the 
practice of creating and remixing content to post online, there is still a `participation 
divide' based on a number of socioeconomic factors such a race, gender, and educa tion that leads some groups to post and share content more than others. 

with this in mind, we turn to previous research on twitter to more fully elabo rate the modal affordances of this platform. one cue that has been appropriated on 

 ssae
twitter (and in other web 2.0 contexts) is the process of addressing or tagging a user 
by using the @ symbol. this is an example of a process that was generated by twitter 
users and was later built into the twitter interface by the developers so that typing the 
sequence `@username' created a clickable link to the addressed user's profile as well 
as notifying the user that they had been mentioned. in a massively multi-participant 
public environment like twitter, a high degree of addressivity is required if a user 
is attempting to conduct a conversation (honeycutt & herring, 2009). addressivity 
using @ was not always intended to be conversational; for example, another signifi cant use of @ was to attribute talk to other authors, specifically in retweets. another 
method of tagging tweets is using the hashtag symbol #, which tags tweets with keywords that are searchable and followable. in an analysis of tweets following the 2008 
united states presidential election, michele zappavigna (2011) describes hashtags 
as a way to create community on twitter by making talk searchable online. using 
hashtags, users can find and interact with other users who are discussing the same 
topics; this can lead not just to conversations with other users and an expansion of 
a user's network of connections around shared topic interest, but also discovery of 
material for their own twitter timeline through retweeting. 

boyd et al. (2010) described early practices of retweeting, showing how attri bution may be obscured by users attempting to conform to the character limit 
while also adding comments and retaining the content of the original tweet. they 
found several strategies that users employed to formulate retweets, the most 
frequent of which was restricting attribution to one user rather than a series of 
users. this particular practice was the main cause of obfuscation of authorship -- 
sometimes, when presented with a string of usernames in a multiply-retweeted 
message, new retweets would reduce the string and inadvertently omit the origi nal tweet's author. an example from boyd et al. (2010: 8), below, shows how the 
original tweet's author, zephoria, has been deleted in a subsequent retweet as part 
of a string of authors.

a)   @jtoddb: rt @mstonerblog rt @zephoria: new blog post "is facebook for 

old people?" based on interviews w/ teens in atlanta http://bit.ly/v0aps.
b)   @sparepixel: rt @mstonerblog: new blog post "is facebook for old 

  ssss

people?" based on interviews w/ teens in atlanta http://bit.ly/v0aps. 
always insightful!

murthy (2012: 1066) also discusses the use of retweeting for the purpose of intro ducing new voices into an interaction on twitter, suggesting that retweets not only 
enable users to bring the words of others into a new context much in the same 
way as reported speech or constructed dialogue, but create the impression of a 
conversational exchange. with changes to the twitter interface, automatic retweets 
preserve the identity of the original author which can lead to greater exposure; 
therefore, exposure-minded users of twitter attempt to craft tweets that may lead 
to many retweets and increase their own popularity. in a study of the likelihood of 
tweets being retweeted, wang, chen, and kan (2012) found that short, humorous 
tweets expressing the author's personal opinion are likely to be retweeted, while 
personal updates and complex tweets are less likely to be retweeted. xu and yang 
(2012) investigated features of tweets that promote retweeting, and found that 
the primary factor influencing retweet numbers on tweets is a social connection 
between the two users - that is, if user a has retweeted user b previously. 

it is also interesting to note that retweets in boyd et al.'s study were often seen 
as a tacit signal of agreement or approval of the content. this follows on bakhtin's 
argument that repetition of the words of others will have one of two different basic 
meanings - to parody the source or to honor or agree with the source (morson & 
emerson, 1990). the primary way for users to disagree with the content of an original 
tweet was to add a comment to the retweet expressing the contrary stance, a modal 
affordance not available to users of the retweet form later added by twitter designers.

while the change in the twitter interface may not have changed users' motiva tions for retweeting, it has altered not only the potential form of the retweets, but 
also the ways in which multiple voices can be represented in a single tweet. in this 
article, we look at how the interface changes have impacted practices of retweeting, 
specifically with regard to attribution of roles in the production of talk. we argue 
that the change has given rise to two co-existing forms of retweeting which allow for 
differing participation structures and different ways of framing the information for 
interpretation by a tweeter's audience.

 ssae
oeo/aeoeo/oe !"o/ #$% &'())o/) %* +o/!$o/o/!)

the retweet examples used in this study come from the pittsburgh corpus, tweets from 
the summer of 2012 that were collected by searching and archiving the keywords pittsburgh, pitt, and pgh. using this sample, we analyze the discursive strategy of retweeting 
in mundane talk on twitter. we deploy a qualitative approach due to the in-depth user 
knowledge required for understanding modal affordances as they impact usage. we 
focus on a descriptive analysis of the practices currently in place for the twitter user base and use example tweets (also referred to as "tweet utterances" by murthy 2012: 
1067) to illustrate the practices gleaned from our corpus. using this method of analysis, 
we define the two classes of retweets with associated examples drawn from the corpus 
and discuss how they relate to reported speech, participation, and attribution. 

at the time of the data collection, two primary options were available to users 
in the interface and commonly used in practice for retweeting. in defining these two 
retweet forms, we borrow from boyd et al.'s (2010) classification of `preserver' and 
`adapter' types of retweeters. as boyd et al. found, "in deciding how to adjust a tweet 
for retweeting, a significant divide arises between respondents who seek to preserve 
as much text of a tweet as possible and those who are willing to adapt retweets 
by removing various parts of the tweet that were, in their opinion, nonessential" 
(2010: 5). the new interface-enabled form of retweeting requires the retweeter to 
preserve the original tweet in full form, including the username and profile picture 
of the original tweeter, and thus we use the term preserving retweet (rt) to describe 
this tool. alternatively, the user-generated form of retweeting allows retweeters to 
adapt or alter the tweets to fit their needs, including possibly deleting any reference 
to the original source of the tweet. we therefore use the term adapting retweet (rt) 
to refer to this style of retweeting; while altering the content of the original tweet 
is not required, it is always an option for the retweeter. additionally, the original 
tweet is removed further from its original context, as the audience of the retweet 
will see the profile picture of the retweeter and that tweeter's username at the top of 
the tweet, as opposed to the identifiers of the original tweeter. it may be helpful to 
think of the adapting rt as a `manual' retweet, indicating that the user must manu ally reproduce content, and the preserving rt as an `automatic' retweet in which the 
content is automatically ported by the twitter interface. 

  ssae

the preserving retweet
the newer style of retweeting, the preserving retweet, was introduced into the 
twitter interface in 2009 as a response to the widespread user practice of redis tributing the tweets of others. by including this function in the twitter toolbox, 
the developers attempted to improve upon the user-generated retweet function, 
specifically aiming to deal with confusion and inaccuracy in attribution and allowing users to retweet the entire content of an original tweet without having to 
modify the tweet (plus the rt notation and the username of the original tweeter) 
to fit into the 140-character limit (stone, 2009). however, as was anticipated by 
former twitter developer ev williams in his 2009 blog post discussing the function 
(williams, 2009), differences in the appearance and function of the retweets led 
users to adopt the new twitter-introduced style for some purposes and maintain 
the original retweet style for others.

in preserving retweets, the original tweet cannot be modified - it is simply reproduced in its original form, with no additional content added. when user a retweets 
user b with the preserving rt style, the retweet shows up in user a's timeline as if 
it has been cut out of user b's timeline and pasted into user a's. this is indicated by 
the inclusion of user b's name and avatar along with the text, as well as the infor mation that it has been retweeted by user a at the bottom of the tweet.  figure 1,1 
below, shows a preserving retweet. the original author, luigilemieux, has both his 

 1  the authors have endeavoured to source the best possible resolution images of all tweets cited in this 

article. in some cases, as in  fig. 1, twitter accounts have been suspended since the original tweets 
were posted and it has not been possible to reproduce a high quality digitisation of content.

figure 1: preserving retweet: the user pensnation_ken retweets a tweet originally 

created by the user luigilemieux, "a pittsburgh penguin walks into a bar . . . no 
timetable for his return."

 ssae
username and avatar appear in the newsfeed, and the retweeter, pensnation_ken, 
has his name appear underneath the retweet with a double-arrow icon.

this contrasts with the adapting rt in that it reproduces both the avatar and 
username of the original tweeter. this facilitates attribution to the original author 
more easily than the adapting rt, which allows for erasure of attribution, as seen in 
tweets observed by boyd et al.

the adapting retweet
the adapting rt is similar to the most common user-generated form of retweeting 
studied by boyd et al. (2010). in adapting rts, user a can indicate that they are reproducing text from user b by marking the quoted text off with the capital letters "rt" 
followed by the username of the original tweeter. the text from the original tweet 
can be modified (although it does not have to be), and user a can add their own text, 
which is often placed before the rt and retweeted material. the most common syn tax of adapting retweets is: {comment text} rt @{author} {retweeted text}. as can 
be seen in  figure 2, in this method of retweeting the avatar and username of the 
user performing the retweet (here, user sta7ic) appear in the timeline, just as they 
would for regular tweets produced by this user. the retweeted material appears after 
the acronym rt, and the identification of the original author with "@thepittnews," 

figure 2: adapting retweet: sta7ic retweets material from thepittnews ("posvar a 

better-planned building than the cathedral [link]") with a preposed comment indicating the user's stance towards the retweeted content ("yeah, no. @posvarhall is 
one of the worst i've seen").

  ssae

and sta7ic's added comment ("yeah, no. @posvarhall is one of the worst i've seen") 
appears at the beginning of the tweet.

sta7ic is highlighted as the participant who is sharing this tweet, as we see 
his username and profile picture prominently featured, while the author of the 
retweeted material, thepittnews, is less readily apparent on first glance at the tweet.

while other forms of sharing previous tweets also continue to exist, such as the 
use of quotation marks around the retweeted text or the retweeted text followed by 
the notation "(via @username)," these forms are used only occasionally while the 
preserving and adapting rt styles are by far the most prevalent.

analysis: relationship of rts to principalship and  authorship
retweeting, as a form of sharing prior talk, raises interesting questions of princi palship, authorship, and the mixing of voices in a stretch of talk. in this section, 
we show how preserving and adapting retweets build different participation 
frameworks on the production side of talk. for tweets that do not include reported 
speech, a single twitter user can be assigned all four roles of animator, broadcaster, 
principal, and author. however, beyond this simple production framework in which 
one participant assumes multiple roles, there are many instances in which multiple 
participants can be assigned to a single role, or where the connection between participants and the roles that they play is unclear, notably in many retweets. in this 
section, we discuss examples of tweets demonstrating variations of this ambiguity 
of participant roles.

figure 3 illustrates the participant roles in a straightforward way with a basic 
tweet (by `basic,' we mean a tweet that includes only text, not any retweets or @ 
mentions of other users). the user ord410 inhabits the roles of animator, broad caster, author, and principal (as shown in the accompanying participant roles table). 
the first person deictic pronoun `i' points to ord410 as its referent and therefore 
indicates his or her principalship. as for the authorship and animatorship of this 
tweet, while it is possible that this tweet was not composed or physically written by 
the user ord410, the content of the tweet does not give us any reason to believe that 

 ssae
this is the case. finally, since this tweet was visible in ord410's timeline, ord410 is 
the broadcaster of this talk.

in figure 4, below, we see a basic tweet in which the principal role is filled by 
a participant other than the animator/broadcaster, and the author role is shared 
and to some degree unclear. the user josephperson is the animator and broadcaster 
of the tweet, having physically produced the tweet utterance and shared it in his 
timeline. the actual content of the tweet, however, is attributed to another person, 

name author principal animator broadcaster
josephperson ? x x
ron rivera ? x
figure 4: at tweet representing a twitter user (josephperson) acting as an animator 

and broadcaster, but attributing the talk to another participant (ron rivera) as 
principal. due to the use of indirect quotation, authorship of the tweet is unclear. 
a gloss of this tweet reads: josephperson says that ron rivera says that starters will 
only play a minimum thursday against pittsburgh, if at all.

name author principal animator broadcaster
ord410 x x x x

figure 3: a basic tweet by the user ord410 representing a single participant acting 

as author, principal, animator, and broadcaster of the message. the table indicates 
the participant roles held by ord410.

  ssae

ron rivera, who is the principal of the message. (note that the original utterance by 
ron rivera is not in the form of a tweet, but rather was made in another medium, 
hence this is not a retweet.) finally, the authorship of the exact wording of the tweet 
is unclear; because the tweet makes use of an indirect quotation form, it is not clear 
whether ron rivera's words are being repeated as he originally uttered them, or if 
josephperson has changed the words to some degree to make them fit into the character limit or to portray the message more clearly. much like tannen's (2007: 110) 
argument for constructed dialogue, it is possible that much of this quote is con structed from memory and only loosely matches the original form of ron rivera's 
actual talk. while it remains clear then that the talk is meant to be attributed to 
rivera, we cannot know the extent to which the words that appear in the tweet have 
been composed by rivera himself or by josephperson. this ambiguity is noted in the 
accompanying chart in figure 4, indicating that both rivera and josephperson may 
have had some role in the authorship of this tweet.

in figure 5 below, the content of the tweet in  figure 4 has been retweeted by 
the user jjones9 in an adapting retweet. ron rivera is still the principal, josephper son is still the animator, having physically typed out the text, and the author role is 
still unclear with both rivera and josephperson as possible contributors, but there is 
a new broadcaster for this retweet. jjones9 takes up the broadcaster role by retweeting the content of another person's tweet to his followers. (jjones9 is the animator, 
broadcaster, author, and principal for the added rt notation; however, as this nota tion is simply an indicator of sharing a prior tweet and no new substantive content is 
added, we will not discuss the roles for such notation further.)

the adapting retweet, as stated above, can also be used by retweeters to add their 
own comment to the retweeted material. figures 6 and 7 provide an example of this, 
where we can see that the retweeter has added additional content to the original tweet 
he or she is sharing.  figure 6 shows a basic tweet from user pittghotch, in which 
pittghotch acts as the animator, broadcaster, author, and principal of the tweet, while 
figure 7 illustrates an adapting rt of the tweet in 6 with a preposed comment depicting the stance towards the retweeted material of user oaklandzoo (named for the student support section at the university of pittsburgh men's basketball games). 

 ssae
figure 6: a basic tweet from pittghotch reporting some news from the university 

of pittsburgh.

name author principal animator broadcaster
jjones9 x
josephperson ? x
ron rivera ? x

figure 5:  an adapting retweet of the original tweet in figure 4. here jjones9 is 

acting as broadcaster, sharing the talk with his followers, but not acting as a prin cipal, author, or animator of the talk. a gloss of this tweet reads: jjones9 reports 
that josephperson said that ron rivera says that starters will only play a minimum 
thursday against pittsburgh, if at all.

in the adapting rt in figure 7, there are two sets of participant roles in play. for 
the preposed comment "wow," oaklandzoo is the principal and broadcaster, with an 
unidentified member of the student group acting as author and animator. however, 
for the retweeted text, the original user pittghotch retains all of his participant 
roles except broadcaster, which has been taken over by oaklandzoo in this retweet. 
figures 5 and 7 illustrate the dual utility of the adapting rt - the retweeter can simply act as a broadcaster as seen in figure 5, or retweeters can add content indicating 
their own stance towards the retweeted comment for which they take on additional 

  ssae

utterance  name author principal animator broadcaster
"wow" oaklandzoo x x x x

pittghotch

utterance name author principal animator broadcaster
"pitt will install 

an outdoor . . . "

oaklandzoo x

pittghotch x x x
figure 7: an adapting rt with a comment. the tweet in 6 is retweeted by @oak landzoo, with an additional comment ("wow") added before the retweeted text as 
a response. the two tables illustrate participant roles for each of the two parts of 
the tweet.

production roles, along with being the broadcaster of the entire content of the tweet, 
as exemplified in figure 7. in figure 5, the retweeter's stance can only be assumed 
by the audience, as no indication of stance is given. comparatively, in  figure  7, 
oaklandzoo makes his or her amazement clear through the addition of the stancetaking comment "wow." these examples illustrate the flexibility of the adapting rt; 
this flexibility is an important motivation for the continued use of this retweet form.

figure 8  illustrates a tweet by josephperson, while  figure 9  illustrates a 
preserving rt by peggyskid. in  figure 8, josephperson is the animator, broadcaster, 
author, and principal of his original tweet, which is broadcast on his homepage. in 
the preserving rt in  figure 9, peggyskid takes over as broadcaster, having rebroad cast the tweet to his or her own followers. while peggyskid assumes the broadcaster 

 ssae
role, josephperson remains the animator, author, and principal, as the tweet is still 
clearly attributed to him and no reanimation of the text is required for the retweet. 
the shift in broadcasters is the only participant role shift that is available to users of 
preserving rts, as the affordances of this type of retweet do not allow for the addi tion or modification of content or for erasure of attribution to the original tweeter.

the primary differences between the preserving and adapting rt forms might 
be seen in the ways in which they assert the heteroglossia of the retweeted material. 
the preserving rt retains clear ties to the participant(s) in the animator, author, and 
principal roles for the original tweet content, both visually and in the text, by post ing the original tweeter's avatar picture and username with the retweet and giving 
no opportunity for erasure or change that could lead to confusion in attribution or 

name author  principal animator broadcaster
josephperson x x x
peggyskid x

figure 9: josephperson's tweet from 8 is retweeted by peggyskid, as indicated by the 

retweet symbol and text "by peggyskid" below the content of the tweet.

figure 8: a regular tweet from josephperson reporting news about the pittsburgh 

steelers football team.

  ssae

new authorship of the content. the essential component of the preserving rt, then, 
is that it only allows a retweeter to take over the broadcaster role, eliminating the 
possibility of confusion over other roles, but also not giving the retweeter any chance 
to express their stance towards the material they are sharing. the adapting rt, in 
contrast, gives retweeters more control over the shared material, allowing them to 
add or alter the content and form of the retweet to fit their purposes and to indicate 
their feelings about the shared text, as well as to highlight their own participation 
through the inclusion of their own avatar in the tweet (instead of the avatar of the 
original tweeter). as the following section will show, however, it is in this freedom 
that the participant roles begin to intertwine, leading to potential for attribution to 
be obscured or erased in the process of using the adapting rt form.

retweet forms and the obfuscation of attribution
potential confusion of authorship and attribution can arise through the use of the 
adapting rt form. an example is figure 8, an adapting rt of the tweet in 9, specifically the preserving rt done by peggyskid. the user meemah2aobl has added the 
tweet-final comment "awesome!" which was presumably one motivation for using 
the adapting rt form instead of the preserving rt form. the most common adapting 
rt syntax is {comment} rt {@username}{original content}, with possible recursion 
of `rt {@username}{content}' for a chain of retweets. however, meemah2aobl deviates from this syntax, and as a consequence, the authorship of "awesome!" may be 
incorrectly assigned by a viewer who has not seen the original tweet by josephperson 
or the preserving rt by peggyskid.

following the most common retweet syntax, the comment "awesome!" could 
appear to belong to the original tweet by josephperson. this practice of adding 
tweet-final comments is one of the primary sources of confusion in retweeting 
according to boyd et al. (2010). in the conventional adapting rt practice, comments 
added before the rt notation provide a clear barrier between the added comment 
and the original retweeted material. furthermore, this barrier indicates to the reader 
the point at which the retweeter shifts participant roles from author to broadcaster. 
in  figure  10, the postposed comment eliminates this barrier, creating syntactic 

 ssss
opacity, which creates ambiguity about the source of the "awesome!" comment and 
its associated stance.

while there is confusion over the attribution of the postposed comment in 
figure 10, one thing that the adapting rt allows users to accomplish is the indica tion of a chain of sharing prior tweets. in  figure 10 , meemah2aobl was able to 
indicate where he or she found the retweeted material, showing others that it was 
because of peggyskid's broadcast that meemah2aobl came across the tweet from 
josephperson. the possibility to include a chain of attribution is one of the facets 
that distinguishes an adapting rt from a preserving rt. while users do not always 
include the chain of attribution in an adapting rt, it is possible to do so. the chain 
of attribution is obscured in a preserving rt, which shows only the original author 
and not any subsequent retweeters.

the tweets in  figure 9 demonstrate this problem of attributing intermediary 
sources through preserving rts.  figure 11  is an original tweet by pittprofdude, 
while  figure 12  shows two preserving rts by parnopaeus and ftd318. these 
preserving rts were produced for the purposes of illustrating this phenomenon, 
and the retweet from ftd318 was produced from parnopaeus's retweet. unlike 
figure 10, which shows meemah2aobl's intermediary source, in  figure 12 the 

utterance name author principal animator broadcaster
"awesome!" josephperson ?? ?? ??

peggyskid ?? ?? ??
meemah2aobl ?? ?? ?? x

figure 10: adapting rt that embeds the preserving rt found in figure 9. josephperson's original tweet is included in this adapting rt along with peggyskid's rt, but 
it also includes a postposed comment "awesome!" made either by meemah2aobl 
or another participant that meemah2aobl is copying text from. many of the par ticipant roles are unclear for a viewer of this tweet in isolation, indicated by "??s".

  ssae

figure 11: a tweet by pittprofdude including a link.
figure 12: two preserving rts of the tweet in figure 11, as retweeted by users parnopaeus and ftd318. from the information contained in preserving rts, any potential 
intermediary sources are not attributed.

intermediary sources of ftd318's preserving rt cannot be traced. due to the modal 
affordances of the preserving rt, there is no possibility for ftd318 to give credit to 
parnopaeus's role as a broadcaster, which led to ftd318 discovering pittprofdude's 
tweet. the affordances of the preserving rt, then, while quite clearly retaining the 
original author of the tweet, erase any chain of attribution in broadcasting. for 
many tweeters this lack of attribution to intermediary sources may not be seen 
as a problem -- the original tweeter is given credit for the material they produced 
and it might not be relevant to others how the retweeter came across this tweet. 
however, in a culture highlighting `micro-celebrity' on twitter (see marwick and 
boyd, 2011, and page, 2012, for further discussion), in which users gain popularity 
based on numbers of followers, retweets, interactions, and overall exposure, it can 
be important to some users that they gain attribution for their role in the produc tion of the retweeted material, even if that role is only one of broadcasting. for 

 ssae
some users, then, the constraints of the preserving rt that keep them from attrib uting the broadcasting chain (or being attributed themselves) might be enough to 
prevent them from using this retweet form.

while the functional affordances of adapting rts allow for the intermediary 
attribution that preserving rts do not, it is still the user's decision whether or not to 
include any sources at all. one of the consequences of using an adapting rt is that 
users can erase the author by deleting indicators of attribution to the original author. 
according to boyd et al. (2010), this is often done by retweeters to reduce the character count of their message so that it fits in the 140 character limit imposed by twitter. 
while the "rt" notation is meant to signify to readers that the initial stretch of talk 
is authored by the original tweeter, the "mt" is commonly used to make it clear 
to the audience that they have, in fact, modified the original content in some way. 
figure 13 shows an example of this phenomenon in which the user themadhessian 
has used the acronym mt (for `modified tweet') to indicate modification of the 

utterance name author principal animator broadcaster
mt #pitt qb tino 

sunseri said  
transition . . . 

the mad hessian
???
tino sunser

x?
x? x

x?

x?
x

x

figure 13: an adapting-style rt with the notation `mt' indicating that the original 

text has been modified. the user themadhessian inserted the preposed comment 
"bazinga!" to take a stance towards another user's tweet containing the quote 
from tino sunseri, however attribution to the original creator of the tweet containing the tino sunseri quote has been erased. the chart explains participant roles 
only for the text which appears outside of quotation marks.

  ssae

original replicated content. many users now use this mt notation to mark a distinc tion between adapting-style rts that are faithful to the original form and those that 
the retweeting user have altered in some way. here, themadhessian has deleted the 
original author's username in the retweeted material. presumably, the author's username was erased so that themadhessian could include the comment "bazinga!" 
at the beginning of the tweet and stay within the character limit. this motivation 
likely also explains the modification of the retweeted text, although it is unclear 
to what extent themadhessian has taken over an authorship role for this portion 
of the tweet. due to the deletion of the username, it is difficult to trace the origi nal tweet and therefore difficult to discern the ways that the text has been modi fied. although it is clear that something has been modified in the tweet, thanks the 
themadhessian's use of mt, because the original tweet is not easily traceable for 
those reading the tweet, there is no immediately clear answer as to which parts of 
the modified tweet are authored by themadhessian and which are authored by the 
unknown and unattributed author.

further compounding the confusion of participant roles in  figure  13 are 
the quotation marks included in the modified tweet. as typically used in writ ten forms of reported speech, quotation marks indicate direct representations of 
actual talk by a referenced speaker; similarly, on twitter, quotation marks are a 
resource that can be used in modified tweets to indicate which portions of the 
original tweet are unaltered. the quotation marks around the text "a high school 
offense to a pro-style/college offense" create ambiguity resulting in two possible 
readings: either the quoted text is meant to represent an actual spoken utterance 
from tino sunseri, or the quoted text is unaltered content retweeted from the 
unnamed author's original tweet. the modified retweet in  figure  13 seems to 
suggest the first interpretation, in which the quoted material should be attributed 
to tino sunseri.

the modified retweet by fiegs2point0 in  figure  14, below, however, shows 
an instance of quotation marks being used to indicate the parts of the tweet that 
belong to the original author. fiegs2point0 uses the following syntax to distinguish 
the parts of the tweet that he has authored and the parts attributed to bcuban: mt: 

 ssae
"@{author}{retweeted [altered] text}" {postposed comment}. the quotation marks 
set off the retweeted text from fiegs2point0's postposed comments, demarcating 
the boundaries of authorship for the text "welcome back james mcdonald #pirates" 
as shared text from bcuban, while fiegs2point0 has added the hashtag "#scally wag" and the username "@jfamacdonald" (presumably for the purpose of letting 
macdonald know that bcuban has spelled his name wrong). fiegs2point0 has also 
employed square brackets within macdonald's last name in the retweeted text to 
indicate his correction to bcuban's original tweet (and thus the "modified" part of the 
mt), indicating that fiegs2point0 is the animator and author of this added letter, and 
the principal of the correction. the use of quotation marks here is in contrast with 
figure 13, in which the quotation marks used in conjunction with the mt and the 
deleted author add ambiguity regarding authorship and principalship of the retweet 
material. in both  figure 13 and figure 14, we can see that this heteroglossic style 
of reproduction and alteration serves to both add voices to the talk and, at times, 
confuse the assignment of these voices.

name author principal animator broadcaster
fiegs2point0 [x] [x] [x] x
bcuban x x x

figure 14: user bcuban's original tweet, with user fiegs2point0's adapting rt with 

modifications and additional comment indicating that bcuban had misspelled 
james macdonald's name. fiegs2point0 calls bcuban a "scallywag" for this error 
using a hashtag, and then tags the twitter account of james macdonald (@jfamacdonald). brackets are used to indicate an addition of a letter to correct a spelling 
error in bcuban's tweet. fiegs2point0 is the animator only for the material that 
appears in brackets to correct bcuban's spelling. fiegs2point0 occupies all partici pant roles for the postposed comment "#scallywag @jfamacdonald".

  ssae

while it is clear from the examples above that there are many retweeting prac tices in use that allow for ambiguity in representation of authorship and princi palship, the core practices are familiar enough for most twitter users that these 
practices can be exploited for creative and humorous ends. while the "mt" notation 
allows users to overtly indicate to others that they are altering the retweeted text, the 
examples in figure 15 demonstrate creative uses of retweet conventions by taking 
advantage of the norms of interaction through a flouting of the rules. here, we have 
included two humorous tweets in the form of adapting retweets from robdelaney 
demonstrating this clever appropriation of stance-taking norms.

here, robdelaney uses the adapting rt form to construct tweets which he 
falsely attributes to user barackobama as a tool for humor. this option would not be 

name author principal animator broadcaster
robdelaney x x x x
barackobama [suggested] [suggested] [suggested]

figure 15: two tweets fully authored by comedian robdelaney, created in the form 

of an adapting rt, as an attempt to humorously (and falsely) attribute talk to president barack obama. the participant roles of author, principal, and animator are 
suggested to belong to barackobama through the syntax of the retweet.

 ssae
available for the preserving rt form since the tweets ascribed to barackobama do not 
actually exist, and therefore cannot be retweeted through twitter's built-in retweet 
tool. the adapting rt format can be used to fictitiously share the text, however, and 
robdelaney adds a preposed comment to each of these tweets to validate his use of 
the adapting rt form, as well as to distance himself from the material in the retweet. 
robdelaney uses the adapting rt form to ascribe authorship and principalship of 
the constructed text to barackobama. the humor in these tweets is in the fact that 
the text was not actually produced by barackobama, and therefore the authorship is 
retained by robdelaney and the principalship is ascribed to robdelaney's voiced ver sion of barackobama. by strategically taking advantage of recognized patterns of use, 
this method of imposing multiple voices onto one tweet exemplifies the heteroglossic nature of the adapting rt.

emergence and standardization
an underlying theme of the co-existence of adapting and preserving rts is the 
tension between emergent practices and the standardization of those practices. in 
describing emergent grammar, hopper (1987: 142) defines emergence as "a continual 
movement towards structure, a postponement or `deferral' of structure, a view of 
structure as always provisional, always negotiable, and in fact as epiphenomenal, 
that is, at least as much an effect as a cause". hopper's definition primarily deals with 
structure; however, such structures emerge through use and practice, and it is this 
aspect of emergence that we apply to the retweeting phenomenon.

as seen by the move by some users towards incorporation of the "mt" nota tion to indicate modified content, the adapting rt shows clear evidence of being 
an emergent practice, continually evolving as it spread throughout the population 
of twitter users. because of the nature of emergence, it is continually negotiated 
in its rules for use. when twitter codified the retweet in its interface, creating the 
preserving rt, suddenly there was a standard, institutionalized structure to retweet ing that had not existed previously. there became structure in retweeting, including 
constraints imposed by the interface. which did not precisely match up to the con tinually evolving norms in adapting rt practice. 

  ssae

it is evident from twitter's early release notes on the preserving rt that they did 
not anticipate this function to replace the adapting rt. ev williams writes in his blog 
post about the release of the retweet button: 

keep in mind, there's nothing stopping you from simply quoting another tweet 
if that's what you want to do. also, old-school retweets are still allowed, as 
well. we had to prioritize some use cases over others in this release. but just as 
twitter didn't have this functionality at all before, people can still work around 
and do whatever they want. this just gives another option. (williams, 2009)

this signals that the developers understood retweeting as an emergent practice, and 
while they were standardizing one particular incarnation of retweeting and giving 
officially-sanctioned structure to it, they were not taking away the ability of the userbase to continue their emergent practice. this showed that although preserving rts 
existed as a single snapshot of retweeting practice, the very nature of retweeting 
as an emergent practice suggested that it would continue to evolve outside of the 
structure being imposed on it. 

as expected, adapting rts continued to thrive, and as such, twitter responded 
again with a new addition to their retweeting interface on april 6, 2015. users can 
now choose the conventional preserving rt form, but they are now given the option 
to "add a comment" before retweeting. if the user does not add a comment, the 
preserving rt is added to their timeline as it has been since the addition in 2009. 
however, when the user chooses to add a comment, it will now show up in their 
timeline as if they tweeted an original tweet, with the retweeted text linked below 
the added comment. this allows the user to make use of the full 140 character limit 
for their own comment without cutting out any of the retweeted material. the fol lowing example in figure 16 illustrates such a retweet from fieldhousemedia.

here, @fieldhousemedia has retweeted original content from coachtomherman. 
we can see the retweeted content below the added comment of "coach herman 
is killing it on twitter. #smsports from fieldhousemedia. the layout of this tweet 
clearly identifies the added comment as coming from the fieldhousemedia account, 

 ssae
while the retweeted text is set off from this text and associated with the original 
tweeter, as well as being a hyperlinked field that takes the reader to the original 
tweet. this new option allows users to take advantage of one of the key features of 
the preserving rt - that is, preserving the full format of the original tweet - while 
also getting the opportunity to add their own stance to the tweet. 

the addition of this feature will undoubtedly have many implications for partici pation structures and the continually evolving practices of sharing talking on twitter. 
as twitter users begin to make regular use of this feature, it will add interesting wrin kles to the ways that users can impose their own voice in reproduced talk. this new fea ture will help to clear up authorship of retweeted material, while still allowing users to 
author their own talk; however, users will undoubtedly continue to evolve with creative 
practices that allow them to blur the lines indicating where their voices end and the 
voice of the original tweeter begins. this feature also helps to demonstrate the tension 
between the interface and user practice. while many twitter users interface with the site 
through mobile applications, this feature is currently only available on the web interface 
at twitter.com. as the feature becomes more and more popular, it will likely be incorpo rated into mobile apps, but in the meantime, access to this feature of sharing talk may 

figure 16: fieldhouse media's retweet with comment of coachtomherman's origi nal tweet. retweet created using twitter's recently "add a comment" feature on 
preserving rts. 

  ssae

impact both the linguistic practices and the access points through which users choose 
to interact with the social media site. this new retweet form will now have the chance to 
do what adapting rts have long been doing in the twitter universe - act as an emergent 
practice with fuzzy rules and ever-changing norms, co-existing with more standardized 
and familiar versions in the preserving and adapting rts described in this paper. 

oeo/aeoeo/!"o/ae# $%& '&o/()"o/ae!%"* +&),&&ae -o/.(o/ /0o/1.(aeoe&!and user practices

in this article, we demonstrated that the two forms of retweeting entail distinct 
affordances which can be both beneficial and problematic in emergent user prac tices. while the preserving retweet form removes much of the confusion about 
authorship and principalship, the adapting retweet is still deployed by twitter users 
for evolving heteroglossic, stance-taking purposes. 

the adapting rt began as an emergent practice that was constantly evolving as 
the practice spread through the user base. retweeting became so widely used that 
the developers of twitter decided to standardize it into what became the preserving 
rt. the top-down implementation of the preserving rt was intended to help users 
negotiate the character limit and allow them to retweet more material more easily; 
however, as the preserving rt did not exactly replicate the affordances of the extant 
adapting rt form, the use of the adapting rt persisted. the co-existence of these 
two forms of retweeting, the user-created and the standardized versions, resulted in 
a new complementary set of emergent practices incorporating both forms. 

the introduction of the preserving retweet added a multimodal dimension of 
attribution by including the original tweeter's avatar in addition to a faithful repre sentation of the retweeted text. the preserving retweet uncomplicates authorship 
and attribution; however, not only does it constrain the retweeter's ability to com ment on the text, it also has the drawback of obscuring possible broadcast chains 
(as seen in figures 11 and 12 above). these broadcast chains are important for the 
micro-celebrity aspect of twitter, allowing users to not only claim content they have 
produced but also content they have discovered and shared with others. 

the adapting retweet allows for the addition of comments, modification of 
tweet content, and highlight of the retweeter through visual cues. however, as   

 ssae
boyd et al. (2010) noted, these additions create the potential for complication of 
authorship and attribution, and squires (2011: 5) notes the potential for the erasure 
of features from a stretch of talk to "privilege the voice of animator and alter the 
voice of author." the increase in affordances available to twitter users since boyd et 
al.'s study has ultimately not resolved the ambiguity of authorship and attribution; 
as seen in  figures 13 and  14 above, even the use of mt to indicate that material 
has been modified does not clearly resolve the issue of who authored the content, 
as the original author can be erased entirely. the changing dynamics of retweeting 
have instead created a multitude of opportunities for both exact reproductions of 
the original text (preserving rts) as well as potential derivations through which the 
retweeter can impose their own voice on the shared material (adapting rts and mts). 

we suggest that the continued use of adapting rts by twitter users (despite the 
constraints on their use which may lead to potential confusion) is part of twitter's 
micro-celebrity culture. the emergent practice of the adapting rt can be attributed 
to users' desire to add their own voice to the text and display their stance towards the 
retweeted text. in this, adapting rts reflect the characteristics of spoken interactions, 
wherein speakers cannot avoid imposing their own stances on repeated dialogue. 
even in exact quotation, something seemingly inconsequential, like intonation, can 
reveal the speaker's attitudes towards the talk (besnier, 1992; tannen, 2007) and 
give them an authorship role without adding lexical content. as johnstone et al. 
(1994) and tannen (2007) have shown, repetition can have many functions resulting 
in subtle changes in meaning and participation, as demonstrated here with the two 
types of retweets presented. although the sharing of prior texts necessarily implies 
some stance towards those texts, direct stancetaking acts are not permitted by the 
affordances of the preserving rt. as bakhtin suggests, the sharing of texts can either 
parody or honor the prior text, but with the preserving rt it is up to readers of the 
retweet to decode the stance being taken by the retweeter. the use of the adapting 
rt permits retweeters to remove the question of their stance towards the retweeted 
material, which is a valuable commodity on a platform where a user's expression 
is already constrained by character limits. this heteroglossia can result in potential 
confusion of authorship and attribution, but this is price users pay for the ability to 

  33 

add their own voice to shared talk. the persistence of the adapting rt demonstrates 
that this price is a reasonable one.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

acknowledgements
the authors would like to acknowledge lauren squires and susan herring for their 
help in reviewing previous versions of this manuscript. 

references
androutsopoulos, j 2011 from variation to heteroglossia in the study of computermediated discourse. in: thurlow, c & mroczek, k r (eds.)  digital discourse: language in the new media . new york: oxford university press, pp. 277-298. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199795437.003.0013
bakhtin, m m 1981 discourse in the novel. in: m. holquist & c. emerson (trans.) the 

dialogic imagination: four essays. austin: university of texas press (original work 
published 1934), pp. 259-422.
becker, a l 1995 beyond translation: essays towards a modern philology. ann arbor: 

university of michigan press.
besnier, n 1992 reported speech and affect on nukulaelae atoll. in hill, j h & irvine, 

j t (eds.) responsibility and evidence in oral discourse. cambridge, uk: cambridge 
university press, pp. 161-181.
boyd, d, golder, s and lotan, g 2010 tweet, tweet, retweet: conversational aspects 

of retweeting on twitter. in: proceedings of the 43rd hawaii international conference on system sciences 2010. los alamitos, ca: ieee press, pp. 1-10.
cherny, l 1995 the modal  complexity of speech events in a social mud.  electronic 

journal of communication,  5: 4. available at:  http://www.cios.org/ejcpublic/ 
005/4/00546.html (last accessed 10 september 2015)
draucker, f 2012, september participation structures in twitter interaction: arguing  

for the broadcaster role.  paper presented at the 11 th meeting of the european 
society for the study of english, istanbul, turkey. 

 34
goffman, e 1981 forms of talk. philadelphia: university of pennsylvania press.
goodwin, c and goodwin, m h 2004 participation. in: duranti, a (ed.) a companion 

to linguistic anthropology. malden, ma: blackwell publishing, pp. 222-244.
gordon, c  2006 reshaping prior text, reshaping identities.  text & talk,  26(4/5): 

545-571. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/text.2006.022
hargittai, e and  walejko, g 2008 the participation divide: content creation and 

sharing in the digital age. information, community and society, 11(2): 239-256.
herring, s c  2010 computer-mediated conversation: introduction and overview. 

language@internet,  7(2). available at  http://www.languageatinternet.org/
articles/2010/2801
hill, j h and zepeda, o 1992 mrs. patricio's trouble: the distribution of responsibility in an account of personal experience. in: hill, j h & irvine, j t (eds.) responsibility and evidence in oral discourse. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press, 
pp. 197-225.
honeycutt, c and herring, s c 2009 beyond microblogging: conversation and collaboration via twitter. in:  proceedings of the 42nd hawai'i international confer ence on system sciences. los alamitos, ca: ieee press.
hopper, p1987 emergent grammar. in proceedings of the thirteenth annual meeting 

of the berkeley linguistics society , pp. 139-157. available at  http://elanguage.
net/journals/bls/article/view/2492 
irvine, j t (1996). shadow conversations: the indeterminacy of participant roles. in: 

silverstein, m & urban, g (eds.) natural histories of discourse. chicago: university 
of chicago press, pp. 131-159.
jirotka, m, luff, p and gilbert, n 1991 participation frameworks for computer mediated communication. europarc: rank xerox.
johnstone, b 1994 repetition in discourse: a dialogue. in: johnstone, b (ed.)  repetition in discourse: interdisciplinary perspective,  volume 1. norwood, nj: ablex, 
pp. 1-20. 
levinson, s c  1988 putting linguistics on a proper footing: explorations in goff man's participation framework. in: drew, p & wootton, a (eds.)  goffman: 
exploring the interaction order. oxford: polity press, pp. 161-227.

  ssae

marwick,  a and  boyd, d  2011 to see and be seen: celebrity practice on twitter. 

convergence, 17(2): 139-158.
morson, g and emerson, c 1990 mikhail bakhtin: creation of a prosaics . stanford, 

ca: stanford university press.
murthy, d 2012 towards a sociological understanding of social media: theorizing twitter. 

sociology, 46(6): 1059-1073. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0038038511422553
myers, g 2010 discourse of blogs and wikis. new york: continuum.
o"rnberg berglund, t  2009 multimodal student interaction online: an ecological per spective. recall, 21(02): 186. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0958344009000184
page, r  2012 the linguistics of self-branding and micro-celebrity in twitter: the 

role of hashtags.  discourse & communication,  6:  181-201. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1750481312437441
pascal, r  1977  the dual voice: free indirect speech and its functioning in the   

nineteenth century european novel. manchester: manchester university press. 
squires, l 2011 voicing `sexy text': heteroglossia and erasure in tv news representations of detroit's text message scandal. in: thurlow, c & mroczek, k (eds.) digital 
discourse: language in the new media . new york: oxford university press,   
pp. 3 25. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199795437.003.0001
stone, b 2009 august 13. project retweet: phase one [web log post]. retrieved from 

https://blog.twitter.com/2009/project-retweet-phase-one (last accessed 10 
september 2015).
suh, b, hong, l, pirolli, p and  chi, e h  2010 want to be retweeted? large scale 

analytics on factors impacting retweet in twitter network. in:  social computing 
ieee second international conference.
tannen, d  1986 introducing constructed dialogue in greek and american con versational and literary narrative. in: coulmas, f (ed.)  direct and indirect 
speech. berlin: mouton de gruyter. pp. 311-322. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1515/9783110871968.311
tannen, d  2007  talking voices: repetition, dialogue, and imagery in conversational 

discourse  (2nd ed.).   cambridge, uk: cambridge university press. doi:  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511618987

2
introduction
in the 20 years between katherine ewing's careful disavowal of the ethnographer's 
"temptation to believe" (1994) and meneses, et al.'s daring proposal for an anthropological "epistemology of witness," grounded in evangelical christian readings of good 
and evil (2014), lie (on the one hand) simon coleman's sensitive discussion of the 
dangers of exposing oneself as an insufficiently distanced "abomination" (2008) and 
(on the other) a bold exposure effected by saba mahmood and others of the partiality 
of the secular world-view and its claims to neutrality (mahmood, 2006, 2008, 2009;  
zine, 2004). inspired by this trajectory and as much by interfaith dialogue as by ethnographic discussions of intersubjectivity, it is in a spirit of feeling that the time is 
(finally) right that i set aside criticisms of projects of comparative religion, draw some 
very narrow debates within indian islam outside of their customary analytic frame work and into a wider one, and offer some thoughts on two vexed questions dear to 
the heart of muslims: authority of interpretation; and the matter of  shirk or deviation from  tauheed, or true monotheism. my starting point for this is a 1970s set of 
formal debates between sects which i encountered as still haunting muslim life during ethnographic fieldwork which i conducted from 2002-2004 in north keralam, 
south india.1 my discussion proceeds from grounds of connectedness: as longtime 
ethnographer of keralam, and as a member of an abramic faith-practice tradition 
which, like islam, engages with wrestling with texts, traditions, and the existence of 
differently situated sub-communities within the wider tradition (christianity). 

keralam's  ulema, religious scholars, have long been holding public debates in 
which apparently well-defined positions backed by textual evidence are presented 
and where audiences are expected to be persuaded or confirmed in their judgment 
that one or other of the positions is rooted in correct interpretation. here, various 
groups of reformists ( tablighi jammat ,  jammat-i-islami etc.) familiar on the south 

 1  i have been conducting fieldwork working in various sites and with different communities in keralam, 

south india, and among kerala migrants in the gulf states, since 1989. since 2000, my main field site 
has been calicut town, (kozkikode) a port and bazaar town on the coast with strong links to the gulf 
stretching back at least to the 10th century. i use indian rather than arabic transliteration conventions 
for terms such as moulud (ar. mawlid).

 3 
asian scene (metcalf, 1982; robinson, 2008; ahmad, 2009) are pitted against  \gamma \delta \theta -
style `traditionalists' (cf. ahmad, 1982; das, 1984), but in practice just one strand 
of reformism dominates kerala: the  islahi mujahids, consisting of two schisms from 
the kerala nadvathul mujahideen, hereafter the knm movement). a broad binary 
distinction prevails (in discourse, in sect affiliation and in kerala's wider social land scape - mosques,  madrassas, charitable foundations etc.) between `mujahids' and 
`sunnis' - in other words, between `islahi' and non `islahi' tendencies.2

as i collected and analysed ethnographic material from  ulema formal public 
debates, from shrine festivals, from popular practice and from everyday conversa tions,  shirk  (deviation from monotheism) emerged as a recurrent preoccupation 
across several registers. as i have written elsewhere, academic (especially anthropo logical/ethnographic) commentators and non-muslims alike often share a certain 
sympathy for `traditional' practices like nercha/urs (shrine festivals) and saint veneration (osella & osella, 2008a, 2008b). this goes along with a widespread academic 
unwillingness or inability to comprehend the gravity - from an inside point of view - 
of shirk. one needs to appreciate that, if one is taking the existence of god as real, 
and if one is also taking as real the claim that god is one and not many, and that god 
wishes - or commands - to be recognised and worshipped as such, then to commit 
shirk is indeed a horrible blasphemy. academic discussions of saint veneration and 
shrine festivals in frankly evaluative terms which pit `cuddly' or syncretistic or imag ined authentic practices against a demonised and joyless and inauthentic, putatively 
foreign-inspired `wah'habism' are not merely wide of the ethnographic mark, but 
also overlook the importance for all muslims of tauheed, the unity and singularity of 
god. i will return to this point later. 

turning then to shirk, which we might follow research respondents in glossing, 
variously, as deviation from monotheism, or the attributing of partners to god, or the 
dilution of god's singular power, i find that my kerala ethnography treads familiar 

 2  see osella & osella (2008a) for a discussion of the problems of terminology, the difficulties of terms 

such as `salafi' and the absolute inaccuracy and inadvisability of terms such as `wahabi'. i choose islahi 
as being the term which mujahid activists themselves use when speaking to me in order to locate 
their movement in global reform landscape.  

4
pathways: reformists deplore tombs, saints, shrine festivals, intercessionary prayer, 
zikr (remembrance chants), moulud  (celebrating the prophet's birthday) and so on; 
traditionalists engage in such practices and defend them. there is no need in this 
paper to reproduce what is an utterly banal ethnographic scenario, and i will use 
my space instead for analysis and argument, where i will follow firstly, my impulse 
towards a de-exceptionalising of islam, making an eccentric move to read debates 
in islam through christian theologies 3 and secondly, make a suggestion that theo logical insights may be useful for academics, before finally turning to recent moves 
towards performative theologies and what they might do. 

\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \theta \xi \pi  \sigma \pi \upsilon \theta \xi \phi \lambda  \psi \omega \delta \theta fffi\upsilon \lambda \theta fl\xi 

recently, working with sympathies to interfaith dialogues, some christian theologians have called for christians actively to engage with islam in order to understand 
better the nature of the abrahamic god which the two traditions share (e.g. swanson,  
2005a, 2005b). swanson (2005b), who teaches protestant christian theology to 
those who will enter (lutheran) ministry, has argued, for example, that, "christians 
need to recognise more fully the force of muslim arguments on behalf of the one ness of god against the doctrine of the trinity . . . . christians could benefit from the 
concept of shirk". nicholas lash, holding for 20 years the chair of theology at cam bridge and britain's seniormost catholic theologian, offers at once a most elegant 
formulation and a very useful generalising statement which can apply across the 
board of all three abrahamic faiths, when he claims that, "people fail in religion in 
one of two ways: they either treat some creature or creatures as god, or they treat 
god as a creature" (lash, 2007: 30-35). such `thinking across' theological debates 
and literatures can then be helpful; and taking theology not as inferior object of 
study for academic discourse but as coeval partner in a conversation can also be 
helpful. 

i am interested in possibilities for conversations both ethnographic and inter faith in the worlds of islam and christianity. as such, i want to situate my kerala 

 3  a version of an accepted `re-positioning' move often made in anthropological theorising - see the 

work of viveiros de castro (2004), marilyn strathern (2005). 

 5 
ethnographic material into wider anthropology of religion debates and write against 
the grain of two types of exceptionalism and narrow focus: firstly, a south asianist 
narrow bias, something which is all too common via regional studies; and secondly, 
another common analytic which would exceptionalise islam (coleman, 2013). i hope 
that by keeping my sideways glance narrow - looking not, for example at pantheistic 
hinduism, but only at a related abramic tradition, that this will be more palatable to 
indian muslims. while general theories of religion are often over-ambitious, a clas sic anthropological `middle level' comparison between related traditions is a good 
starting point.4 working in india - where many of my own fieldwork respondents are 
syrian christians, responsible to an eastern patriarch - also helps de-stabilise repre sentations which would simplistically represent `christianity' as a `western' religion. 
i also refuse all representations which would treat islam as a middle-eastern religion. 
instead, on the one hand i treat both christianity and islam as analagous in being 
global networked religions (voll, 1994) and discursive traditions (asad, 1986), while 
on the other hand also holding fast that we need to pay good attention to ethno graphic situatedness and complexity, without ever falling into the `many islams' or 
`many christianities' trap (osella & osella, 2007). we must recognise the global/ised 
nature of both islam and christianity, and to keep our ear attuned to the claims of 
these two abrahamic traditions for global status and for universalistic messages and 
concerns. i am dispensing with the anthropologist's usual rich empirical and ethno graphic detail, and will only use short examples where needed to make a point. my 
ethnography of the differences and arguments between sects is predictable and does 
not differ from similar material about the reform process which we find over and 
over throughout the muslim world (e.g. ewing, 1997; blank, 2001). 

recently, we've witnessed academic interrogations of the putative neutrality of 
secularism and secularity (e.g. mahmood 2006, 2011). this challenge has not been 
adequately responded to, which is not surprising. still, some scholars have raised the 
question of the slippage between a commitment to secularism into a supporting 
of atheism, a kind of rationalist imperative within hegemonic traditions of doing 

 4  i am hoping also in time to bring in what in this paper is the still-absent third other of judaism. 

6
academic work (king, 2002). there are emerging explorations into the normativity 
and disciplining mechanism of atheism within the academy (e.g. zine, 2004). others 
are experimenting with possibilities for bringing faith-based academic work into 
academic conversations, albeit dressed in the rationally respectable clothing of `phi losophy' (kresse, 2007). if, as simon coleman has noted, academics are not likely to 
take up the call to permit coevalness to the marginalised faith-based stance 5, but to 
remain extremely hostile to such moves (2008), then the academy must at least now 
begin to explore more carefully its own positioning. it ought to cease to privilege 
the highly particularistic ideological commitment to atheism or secularism (with the 
latter being such a problematic term, however defined) as some sort of imagined 
neutral ground, and begin to take up the challenge set by the work of talal asad 
and saba mahmood to examine `secularism' as culturally and historically specific. we 
can recognise that atheism and secularism alike are - like faith - matters of com mitment: a positioning of the academic which will shape, produce, and foreclose 
that academic's analytic possibilities, a standpoint (naples & gurr, 2013) which will 
produce certain kinds of analysis. 

this point leads me back to the question of the status of theological writings 
for those of us working in the academic field of religion. these often offer us highly 
nuanced and sophisticated discussions, such that it is unhelpful to treat such work 
entirely as `insider discourse', or as artefacts whose insights are to be analysed, but 
never taken on board. as an experiment, in this paper i take a lead from performa tive/post-modern theologies (they're not the same) to think through the issues 
raised by my islamic material. my hope is that this move might at once, firstly, demonstrate the potential of academic moves towards a de-exceptionalising compari son; secondly, suggest interesting directions for future comparative analysis; thirdly, 
bring academic theology into the conversation and prompt us to begin to engage 

 5  i'm keeping the term `faith based' because it is in common use, but would register that this term is 

equally problematic, emerging from an understanding that a relationship to god is a matter of faith 
or belief, which is a stance which my research respondents would deny, grounding their relation to 
islam instead in practice, knowledge, experience, ancient and revealed wisdom, and so on. 

 7 
with it; and finally, contribute to the unsettling of the liberal secular hegemony 
which has held sway in academic life. we are in a moment in which a pluralist 
framework now seems possible. eve sedgwick deftly showed us how academic practice came to be ruled by paranoid thinking and by stances of cynicism, disbelief, 
mistrust, fear, disavowal (1997). like bruno latour, whose `compositionist mani festo' treads similar anti-paranoid ground (2010), or eileen joy (2013), who explains 
why hospitality and generosity can be helpful intellectual stances, sedgwick asks 
for academic positionings which do not grow from adolescent practices of mere 
cleverness and suspicion, but from more tempered practices of speaking from a 
generous-hearted wisdom. the paranoid thinking which academic practice of the 
16th and 17th centuries perhaps did indeed require in order to drag itself free from 
church hierarchy and hegemony is not only no longer necessary in this moment - 
when god has decisively been dead for many for a long while - but is now acting as 
a drag on understanding and analysis. 

finally, then, i want to move at the end of this paper towards observing and playing around a little with some possible lines of thought emerging from the post-1980s 
seeping into analytic and theological discourses alike of frameworks which stress the 
inauthenticity of all human attempts to describe and classify, and to capture `reality'. 
as john caputo (1997) observes, in his explorations of the encounter between st 
augustine and derrida, such moves bring us to a space which is near to that of traditional apophatic theology: what do i love when i love my god? as a human, i cannot 
possibly hope to know or delimit this, such that the future must always be left open. 
i will not have space to get into the complexity of such arguments, but merely begin 
to signpost them here. 

kerala's mujahid reformists debates with the sunni majority

i have said that the kerala ethnography is banal. so it is, on first approach: utterly 
predictable. mujahid reformists battle against shrines, saints, festivals, and custom ary practice. traditionalists continue to engage in a range of practices and appear to 
hold beliefs which diverge from modernist reform styles of islam. 

8
and yet . . . 
kerala mujahid reformists' straightforward representation of themselves (e.g. in 
ethnographic interviews which i have no space here to reproduce) as proper mono theists, while others commit  shirk, was only to be expected. but their entirely con ventional and predictable claims to be upholding monotheism against traditionalist 
sunnis' blasphemous failure to hold the line did not prepare me or lead me to expect 
to find what i actually did then hear in the public `kuttichira debate,' nor what i 
observed over two years' fieldwork.

the famed `kuttichira debate,' which ran for over a week in 1976 in kuttichira 
(the principal muslim neighbourhood of calicut/kozhikode, kerala) is one of a few 
public debates continually referred to as a landmark and as clarifying ground between 
sunnis and mujahids. the debate, which drew together ulema from across kerala into 
two factions, affiliated with `reformist' or `traditionalist' camps, spent almost all of its 
time discussing issues around  tauheed, the uniqueness and unity of god. mujahids 
had the opening words, and sunnis were permitted to close the debate. i have access 
to a full transcript in english, and here i only mention a few points which i draw from 
that transcript. 

as i had expected, mujahids accuse sunni traditionalists of engaging in  shirk 
when they `give too much respect' to saints; also stereotypically, mujahids argue that 
petitioning saints or holy people for help is equivalent to praying and hence is also 
shirk. traditionalists also give the usual responses when defending their practices, 
for example, insisting that at a shrine they are `praying with' and not `praying to' 
a saint. so far, so predictable, so familiar (e.g. van der veer, 1992; mayaram, 1997; 
alam, 2008; zaman, 2010). but what i had not expected to find was that traditionalists are equally keen to lay accusations of  shirk at the door of reformists. how can 
this happen? 

traditionalist and mujahid scholars engage in highly complex arguments about 
agency, power and whether power is divisible or not, and - against my expecta tions, formed from familiarity with academic literatures about the different styles of 
islam - both accuse the other side of dilution of god's singular power. 

 9 

at one point in the public kuttichira debate, the reformist mujahids discuss 
isthigasa (help-seeking), and argue that sunnis who pray and ask help at a saint's 
shrine are effectively praying not to god but petitioning and praying to the saint, 
hence committing shirk. this is coherent and familiar ground. but - unexpectedly - 
mujahids appear in the debate as being also at pains to refute sunni accusations that 
they, the reformists, are the ones committing blasphemy, by splitting god's power 
and giving some of it to human beings. let me explain how this accusation arises. 

at one point, the mujahid speaker abdulkhadar has the floor. he insists that 
power and agency in the world can be split: he points out that if one wants the salt at 
table, one knows well that it is in the capacity of a fellow diner to pass it, and so, "we 
don't ask for salt to god, believing that god would come down here with the salt." 
this reformist speaker insists upon making a distinction between human agency - 
passing the salt is covered under this - and divine agency - which is, he claims, a 
quite different type of agency, and is the type which is - blasphemously - being 
attributed by sunnis to human and saintly intercessors. 

speaking for the sunni traditionalists, ap aboobacker musaliyar first returns 
to earlier discussion of  isthigasa. he reiterates the sunni traditionalist position that 
"asking for help" is not "worship," that the two must be understood as distinct, and 
that petitioning saints is legitimate. he also argues that islamic injunctions referring 
specifically to prohibitions on idol-worship are being wrongly extended by mujahids 
towards legitimate `helping' relationships with saints, martyrs, angels, and so on. ap 
also reiterates that all agency flows from god, even in the most trivial and mundane 
issues (like passing the salt at dinner), and that it is indeed possible to ask god for 
anything. 

this traditionalist speaker then turns on the mujahids, "you yourselves have 
said that medicine is not capable alone to cure - that is what we are saying too." 
he also points out that god in the quran itself promises the help of a thousand 
angels. he insists, "gabriel helps. believers and pious people help." he wonders 
why the mujahids continue to ignore this and insist that we can only ask god   
for help. 

10
ek hassan for the traditionalists then also reiterates that all agency flows from 
god and repeats the accusation that to differentiate those actions which are within 
human agency/capability from those actions which go beyond it and into the realm 
of god, is itself a form of blasphemy. he asks the mujahid reformists how they can 
possibly divide power into two types, when the prophet taught that everything 
comes from god. hassan also then reinforces the legitimacy of petition, by moving 
on to cite verses wherein it is advised that gabriel, angels and rightful people will be 
helpers. hassan ends dramatically: 

we can ask for rain, children and what not. when science progresses, the rea son behind everything will be discovered and there won't be any need for god. 
this is the place where these moulavis [reformist teachers] are leading us. 

ap abdulkhadar moulavi (for the mujahid reformists) responds that ordinary help 
seeking - isthigasa - is an ordinary and natural help, which is legitimate; but that asking god's help is a different type of asking, where a different type of help is expected. 
it is, he claims, clearly this type of - supernatural - help which sunnis expect when 
they conventionally call upon the martyrs of the battle of badr. ap then proceeds to 
condemn the common practice of making appeals to martyrs and saints: "nobody 
asks help to muhyudeen sheikh with a belief that he can help in a natural manner."6 

in this and similar exchanges, two things are happening: firstly, the traditional ists are calling upon textual authority to back up their claims that petitioning help is 
permissible and that there are lesser agents who do legitimately help humans; and 
secondly, traditionalists turn the tables by insisting that it is the reformists who must 
face the accusation of siphoning power away from its proper source - god - and of 
committing the dreadful mistake of attributing god's power, not even to the saints 

 6  muhyudeen is the most popular martyr-saint in kerala, and the practice of reciting in his name and 

chanting the moideen mala, poetic verses recounting his story, as a form of prayer and petition, was 
formerly widespread and still endures today in sunni pockets. the vocative exclamation "oh! my martyrs of the battle of badra!" (ente daivame! ente badringale!) was a common one in pre-reform times, 
in the same way that vocative "oh! my god!" is common among kerala hindus and christians.  

 11 
or to the friends of god who may indeed be accepted as having powers of interces sion, but to any ordinary human who is able to "pass the salt" at table. 

the issue of sect differences and these endless points and counter points in 
lengthy and repeated public debates like the classic one at kuttichira seem to turn 
almost exclusively on one key issue: whether one is or is not a proper monotheist. 
the anxiety and issue on both sides then becomes to prove that what one does is 
not shirk. this is an interesting departure from the trend in academic discussions 
of such debates, which focus upon reformist critique of saint and shrine practices, 
but do not enter into the complexities of debates; nor consider counter charges. 
ethnographers have tended to work with one group and not to focus on interactions 
across sectarian divisions; and nowhere have i read about reformists being the ones 
at risk of shirk. 

in my next analytical move, i note that in  ulema debates, the relative weight 
accorded to `tradition/practice/example' versus `only the text' emerges as an important 
preoccupation. again, i do not have time or space here to give ethnography, and again, 
it is entirely predictable that over and over, mujahids present themselves as a revivalist 
`back to the text' movement, which then positions sunnis in an interesting way. on the 
one hand, because mujahids claim text as their foundation and accuse sunnis of  bida 
(unlawful extra-textual innovation), sunnis are placed by this binarised polemic on the 
side of anti-text, tradition, practice, which then easily (so easily!) can slip into charges 
of taqlid, blind following. at the same time, because `tradition' in post-independence 
kerala has become such an uncomfortable and loaded term, sunnis (albeit a huge 
numerical majority), have been forced into the mujahid modernist frame of action: 
they are compelled to engage in debate and to defend their path in ways which follow 
mujahid affectual and decision-making styles - rational, reasoned argument backed 
up with example and text. such styles are perfectly in accord with the modernity which 
has been vigorously promulgated in kerala since colonial encounter. mujahid meet ings therefore have more in common with kerala's mainstream dominant marxist 
groupings than it might at first seem. i will show later how one sunni leader tries to 
interrupt the flow of hegemonic modernist framing of all practice. 

12
while sunnis have been forced (since the 1930s) into public debates in which 
textual authority is given precedence, they have also manage to push past the argu ment that everything that is islam can be straightforwardly or simply traced back to 
or read from texts. in debate, they counter: 

there is no point in boasting that you have recited ten verses. we can't show 
the verse which prohibits us to marry our sister and to marry another girl . . .

sunni ulema also defend extra-textual referents, and plead for the need for islam to 
allow a place for tradition. at times, they also (carefully and discreetly) argue in terms 
of a `greater good' and for the imperative this puts on ulema to work pragmatically with 
the needs and existing practice of believers. this point will also become important later 
when i discuss below more fully the triangle of `text,' `tradition,' and `community.'

in the public kuttichira debate which i have drawn from above, the sunnis close 
in a dramatic way. after a succession of (male) speakers offer point and counter-point, 
each leader is asked to offer his final words, in the manner of a modernist legal court 
case summing-up. mujahids were granted first and penultimate words, sunnis the last.

in a sudden departure from the tone of the entire 5-day debate - rational argu ment, point and counter-point, always backed by text in the manner of a court of 
justice - the sunni  ulema's chief scholar makes his final intervention not by sum ming up his case, but by way of singing a chanted verse:

from wherever i am called
i can answer without my mouth.
those who travelled the right path
can be awarded paradise.

he continues this shift in tone with bold musings in  \gamma \delta \theta  mystic vein: "god's great 
people, they were made great by god himself. they are god's lovers. their life and 
death are equal. . . their karamath (miraculous power) lives on after death . . . they can 
do what they like with these supernatural powers . . . everything is given by god . . . 
power is limitless."

 13 

summarising, mujahids like to present themselves as pure scripturalists, claiming 
that they are returning to the early texts and purging practice of pre-islamic hango vers and later innovation alike, all of which deviates from what is described in quran 
and hadith. mujahids also reject all \gamma \delta \theta  (islamic traditions of jurisprudence), another 
key point distinguishing them from sunnis and making them recognisable as part of 
wider islamic trends advocating a `return to core texts.' like mujahid self-representa tion, academic representations of islamic reformism also often present it as scriptural, 
textual, and as working towards a decontextualised islam stripped of the hangovers of 
pre-islamic culture and of religious innovation alike, guided only by the purity of text 
(robinson, 1993). traditionalists then find themselves, in defending extant and longstanding muslim practices like saint-calling or shrine festivals, placed as somehow 
pitted against textual purity and as allowing greater place for community practice 
than for textual guidance. at the same time, with the rise since the 19 th century of 
modernist styles of public culture, argument, affect, formation of the self and so on, 
one aspect of which is a stress upon text and reasoned ways of knowing, traditionalists 
have been forced onto the back foot and find themselves constrained to work within 
modernist frameworks, of which the public debate which mimics a court-room per formance, with rational speech making and textual `evidence', is a dramatic example.

muslim religious scholars themselves, like the laity, seem then at first blush to be 
caught up in an issue of what relative weight to give to tradition and to scripture. but 
beyond the rhetoric, traditionalists and mujahids alike make appeals to texts at times, 
and ignore texts at other moments. and despite a vast academic literature and public 
representation which would lead us to imagine mujahids as concerned with shirk and 
sunnis as the ones dangerously (in mujahid representation) or liberally and happily 
(in academic representation) as not gripped by anxieties about  tauheed, both groups 
are actually deeply concerned with the problem of  tauheed and  shirk.  meanwhile, 
mujahid and sunni ulema alike in private interviews during fieldwork do not proceed 
by the sort of reasoning evident in their public debates, but instead talk in terms of 
pragmatics, about how best to gather people to them. there is then a tacit recognition 
on both sides of the importance of practice and community; please continue to hold 
this point in mind, as i continue to disrupt the text vs tradition binary. 

14
i have to complexify the common representation which would pit the mujahid = 
textualist rationalists against sunni = traditionalists, as i am reminded of simon 
coleman's discussions of the ways in which evangelical christians relate to the bible 
(1996). the importance evangelicals give to bible, as foundational and opposed to tradition, leaves them committed, for sure, to textualism but also to a sense of the power 
of the word. coleman discusses ways in which evangelicals understand god's word as 
an active, agentive force on its own, beyond human agency, and ways in which they 
expect to see it intruding into presentations and discussions, working in miraculous 
ways beyond rational discussion to change the heart of the listener (cf. keane, 2008). 
holding tightly to textualism is not then, i am arguing, necessarily what is at the root 
of mujahid rationalism; it is more likely kerala's modernist formal-legalist (and often 
marxist) public culture which inflects the mujahid religious aesthetic.

let us think now a little more about the ways in which social groups ally them selves with `text' and/or `tradition' and the ways in which tension arises over which of 
the pair should be used as a guide for ultimate arbitration, via a detour into christian 
histories. this will lead us to an unexpected place. 

the 16th-century christian protestant reformation was, of course, about events 
such as martin luther's calling for solo scriptura (only scripture) - a greater reliance 
on scripture and a rejection of existing tradition, which encompassed such factors 
as the institution of the papacy, the granting of indulgences, saying masses for the 
dead, and so on. in 1520 martin luther burnt the pope's writ against him (the papal 
bull), and named the pope as the anti christ, the demonic figure who appears in the 
last book of the bible. the violence and force of this accusation can hardly be com municated (attributed to martin luther). muslim reformist zeal, which arouses such 
deep repugnance among so many commentators, appears pretty mild when placed 
alongside many statements of christian protestant reformers: "i feel much freer now 
that i am certain the pope is the antichrist", or "reason is a whore, the greatest 
enemy that faith has" (also variously attributed to martin luther).

christian clergy and lay people alike still commonly understand and frame the 
distinctions between catholic and protestant as covering issues such as the possi bility or impossibility of intercession, the extent of the power granted to religious 

 15 
specialists and officials, the place of ritual in one's religious life and how it is to 
be understood in relation to internal intentionality, the status and importance to 
be given to founding texts, and so on - all very familiar ground to christians and 
muslims alike, then. for now, i want simply to note that all of these discussions down 
the years since the reformation - lay, academic, theological - have generally been 
rooted in the question of where lies the ultimate arbiter in christian religious mat ters and the proper guarantor of truth and legitimacy: the text (protestant) or the 
tradition, as passed on from the church's founding fathers down through pope and 
clergy (catholic), via various church councils and proclamations. 

now, the catholic church's momentous vatican ii conference (1963-5) and its 
eventual proclamation  dei verbum  (the word of god) was about overturning the 
catholic privileging of tradition over scripture, which had been doxic to the extent 
that tradition was, in pre-vatican ii catholic theology manuals, seen as independent 
and not requiring any scriptural grounding; this position had hitherto been under stood and justified as an allegiance to the continuity of the living church and a way 
thereby of ensuring authenticity in practice and spiritual understanding. vatican ii 
rejected this, and the reformed post-1965 catholic church has allowed and encour aged a far greater weight to be given to scripture. the charismatic renewal move ment among contemporary catholics pushes heavily upon this point, and engages 
in such protestant-style activities as bible reading classes, the production of daily 
lectionaries for the laity and other activities foregrounding the importance of the 
text (csordas, 2007). like kerala's sunni muslims who nowadays engage in public 
debate justifying their theological positions with reference to texts, the contempo rary catholic church has also made a turn towards a "theology of the word" (see e.g. 
cherbonnier, 1953), previously the preserve of protestants. 

let me take the next step in my argument, which leads me towards the work 
of najeeb george awad, a theologian of the eastern christian church. 7 awad has 

 7  national reformed synod of syria and lebanon. choosing an orthodox eastern christian theologian 

is also part of my rhetorical work of refusing to forget christianity's `forgotten lung' (pope john paul, 
n. date) or to pit `western' christianity against `eastern' islam. india hosts both global religous tradi tions from their outset (visvanathan, 1999; mosse, 2012; ho, 2006; ricci, 2011). 

16
argued that this classic christian division between scripture and tradition is rooted 
in misunderstandings of the relationship between scriptura and traditio, and even of 
the position of martin luther. luther, while he certainly rejected papal authority as 
arbiter of theological authenticity, did not by any means reject traditio (awad, 2008). 
awad also makes the very important point that luther rejected outright the possi bility of hermeneutics based on individual understandings of  scriptura and insisted 
upon the role of the church in passing on scripture to believers, thereby, we have to 
note, allowing a strong role to the church and to its traditions (2008: 68). awad also 
points out that the very existence of differences between different protestant sects' 
interpretations of scripture is due to the contact made by texts with different com munities of readers, and by this move, awad allows in a third pole - community - to 
the classic binary (2008: 74). awad's point about there being an unacknowledged 
third aspect which we need to keep in mind - giving us now a three-cornered inter pretive ground of scripture, tradition, and a community - is important. 

returning to kerala  ulema debates (exactly as one would predict and expect) 
mujahids claim a stance as `scripturalists' - "we put verses before you . . . we demand 
more verses from you" - and sunni traditionalists respond to this with an anti-scripturalist stance which asserts that not all that is right is contained in verses - "there 
is no point in boasting that you have recited ten verses. we can't show the verse 
which prohibits us to marry our sister." but the detour into a parallel abrahamic texttradition binary and awad's assessment of it pushes recognition that both sides are 
actually drawing upon complex configurations, which themselves pull in a combination of appeals: to scripture, to tradition, to contemporary practice, to pragmatic and 
aesthetic-affectual considerations and to the mysteriousness or the clarity of god's 
instructions and communications. assemblages of various human and non-human 
factors come together temporarily into moments of debate or encounter or deci sion, to produce positions which then become ossified into objects with power and 
afterlife, named `mujahid' or `sunni', and shorthanded as associated with `text' or 
`tradition' (stausberg, 2010). as awad argues for the christian case, the gulf between 
muslim sects is more apparent than real. both sides actually draw upon dynamic 

 17 
recommendations for practice rooted for authority within a powerful text which, 
both sides recognise, must never be interpreted individually, but always within the 
context of a recognised tradition, with tradition necessarily embedded - whether 
ulema disavow this or not - in a contemporary living community who claim to be 
heirs to it. just as christians may imagine themselves as engaged in a struggle to 
return to the desert fathers or perhaps to the early church in their revival move ments, but will never actually be able to know - much less replicate - those forms 
of practice, faith, subjectivity, institutions or community, and will instead produce a 
contemporary version of a contemporary understanding of early christianity, so too 
islam is necessarily dealing with text and tradition as they appear now to the people 
who live them today. 

the move towards a foundational appeal to a divide between `text' and `tradi tion,' and the production of communities who then imagine themselves as follow ing `only the text' or opposing this with arguments that `text alone is not enough' 
is then not in any way a description of reality but is part of the rhetorical work of 
difference making and community building. this points towards recent understandings of sect difference as actively and continually produced and performed, as being 
about the identity work necessary if one is to call oneself `sunni' or `mujahid', rather 
than as being rooted in foundational difference or being anchored in actually exist ing incommensurate differences of doctrine, practice or interpretative method. as 
arshad alam argues, discussions about islam may at heart be less about muslim vs. 
non-muslim dynamics than about the production of sectarian difference and repro duction of community, a matter of doing the continual identity work which is necessary if one is to be able to pronounce oneself as `sunni' or `mujahid' (alam, 2008). 

when ulema or laity argue and debate, something is clearly being performed: 
while sectarian stakes were high in the 1930s and 1940s, with families torn apart by 
dis agreement, stone throwing along the road, defections, ostracism and so on, nowa days positions have settled and it is not likely that many - any? - people will leave 
a public debate convinced by what they have heard that they must change their 
position and practice. in the post-1970s days, at the end of the kuttchira debate, the 

18
two sides part, each having stated and re-stated their already well-known positions 
and brought out into the public square some well-worn arguments. in the extracts 
above, nobody involved is expecting sudden revelatory change on either side simply 
as a result of listening to the speeches; the debate is more a matter of enacting dif ference, of bringing supporters of the two sides together and allowing them to make 
public display of their difference and of their disdain for each other. 

once again swerving sideways, we can think about how the four great chris tological councils were enacted (325 nicea, 381 constantinople, 431 ephesus, 
451 chalcedon). these early church councils were public debates which eventu ally produced orthodoxy and identified heresy with regard to the question of how 
christ could be at once `fully human' and `fully divine,' and the histories of these 
debates suggest to us the degree to which they were embedded in communities of 
practice, who then undertook dramatised public performances and shows of allegiance (hanson, 2005; ayres, 2006). public debates on matters raised by the councils spread, as individual bishops vied to push forward their specific stance, and it 
seems that these local events were also at least as much about rhetorical flourish 
and public enactment of a position and show of mass support as they were about any 
effective attempt to convince waverers to switch sides. burrus and lyman write, of  
4th centrury councils, "we have evidence of public demonstrations and debates 
around doctrinal issues . . . whether the resulting acclamations of consensus 
were spontaneous or orchestrated is difficult to judge, though it is clear that 
clerical and doctrinal authority rested to a great degree on popular acceptance" 
(2010: 21).

the next step in my argument is then to point out that `text' and `tradition' alike 
are not here actually signifying what they claim to signify, but are instead being operationalised as indices of community. in this way, my analysis is quite different from 
many anthropologists, who take on very similar types of material to those which i 
work with, but who take the debate at face value and also maintain a hard distinction 
between globalising, `monolithic' scriptural islam and local `lived islam,' with the 
academic's usual clear preference for the second, which has been challenged else where (rao, 2004; de munck, 2005; osella & osella, 2007a). returning to caputo's 

 19 
re-statement of st augustine's question - "what do i love when i love my god?" 
(1997), the answer often seems to be, `a version of myself'. i'll move on in a moment 
to discuss how some 21 st-century emergent theologies are recognising this all-toohuman tendency, and seeking to move beyond it.

ethnographic interjections of shirk talk
i went with jumailath (26) to visit some cousins living in a small unmodernised 
house in a working class neighbourhood out of town; the menfolk here are working 
as unskilled labourers in the gulf, having escaped irregular and poorly-paid work as 
auto-rickshaw drivers back home. as we were admiring the baby swinging gently 
from the roof-beam in his sari-sling, jumailath yelled out, as if burnt, "what's this??!!" 
she was pointing to a small thread tied onto the baby's wrist, containing a silver 
amulet - supernatural protection offered by thangals, kerala's hadrami sayyids, to 
whom - predictably - traditionalists offer respect and believe to be endowed them selves with powers of  barakat (blessing) or able to call upon a saint's  barakat, and 
whom reformists criticise as unscrupulous and unauthorised charlatans. jumailath's 
young cousin (19) shyly but defensively said, "it doesn't do any harm." jumailath, 
exasperated, turned to me and said, "you see?! this is the new generation, they have 
no sense. if we do all this superstitious rubbish, then in what way are we different 
from hindus? tell me!" 

razi, from a poor beach-side family, was looking forward to attending the nercha 
(shrine festival). when i asked him what he thought of reformist opposition, he told 
us, "they say all this is not islam. i do my namaaz, i fast at ramzan - aren't i a muslim 
too?" razi here is arguing for his right, as a muslim (i.e. as an irreducible religionbased identity), as a member of kerala's muslim community and not a hindu or 
christian, to have some say in what may count as proper `muslim' practice. 

imbichibi, an elderly lady who had remained untouched and unimpressed by 
the reformist waves which had swept through her own household, responded to her 
niece's teasing and criticisms with the remark: "how can you say that going to see the 
thangal is a bad thing? is he a bad man? no, you know he is not. he is a good man, 
so how could this be wrong?" 

20
as with catholic and protestant, who tend to imagine themselves as incommensurable communities rooted in a fondness for either  traditio or for  scriptura, but 
who actually tread remarkably similar ground and who have to do strong performa tive work in order to maintain the differences between them, so too, mujahid and 
sunni traditionalists, when we engage them in close interaction, do not appear to be 
standing on either side of an insurmountable mountain, as their rhetorics -  ulema 
and laity alike - would have us believe. they are, indeed, able to engage in public 
debate exactly because the appeals to reasoning and the terms of authentication are 
common to both: that sect leaders and scholars can give guidance to laity through 
appeals to practices which are rooted in a solid community of believers, and which 
can also often (but not always) be justified by reference to text. 

and taking more time to reflect upon the details of the  ulema debate above 
draws us into recognising that, while mujahids claim a stance as `scripturalists' - "we 
put verses before you . . . we demand more verses from you" - and while sunni 
traditionalists respond to this with a stance which asserts that not all that is right is 
contained in verses - "there is no point in boasting that you have recited ten verses. 
we can't show the verse which prohibits us to marry our sister" - actually both sides 
are drawing in the debate upon complex configurations which pull in a combina tion of appeals: to scripture, to tradition, to contemporary practice, to pragmatic 
considerations and to the mysteriousness or the clarity of god's instructions and 
communications. 

we must not then take at face value  ulema - or anybody else's - claims to be 
working straightforwardly from a text or a tradition, although such claims are, of 
course, generally made in good faith. we must complexify our understandings of 
what is happening when people make critique and debate. in an equally important 
move, we must also go beyond a modernist perspective which imagines that `rea soned debate' with textual evidence is actually how theological shifts do proceed - 
or must proceed. recent academic trends have emphasised the democratisation of 
theological debate, as first print and then audio cassettes, dvds, reading and study 
groups, and the like spread (robinson, 1993; hirschkind, 2006). i wonder if per haps the effects of these changes is sometimes overestimated and whether at times 

 21 
too much explanatory power is given to these movements. i also perceive in recent 
trends in studies of islam and the `democratisation of  ijtihad' arguments (especially 
evident in the literature on women's religiosity, e.g. huq, 2008; see review in tohidi 
2003) a privileging of reason which can lead us to overlook embodiment, affect and 
the ways in which persuasion, shift, debate and difference making may (legitimately) 
proceed by other means. attiya ahmad (2010) has a difficult job, trying to allow a 
full human complexity into her accounts of the work done by migrant women in 
the gulf who adopt islam, without laying her respondents open to charges (from 
religious or academic purists alike) of `instrumentality.' jumailath's cousin can only 
try to protest that tying a protective thread "does no harm." imbchibi tries to protect 
keralam's hereditary hadrami-origin charismatic leader by getting agreement that 
he is a `good man.' razi calls upon agreed markers of islam to anchor his claim to 
authentic muslimness. practitioners of faith and those writing about it alike have 
been painted into a corner where it is very difficult to live up to the purist standards 
set by modernist discourse.

while the sunnis have been forced by the growth of reformism into the mode of 
reasoned rational public debate, in which propositions are made and are then backed 
up by verses, they clearly recognise at heart that god may not speak to humanity 
using post-enlightenment styles of communication, nor move in the world accord ing to rational-logical laws of agency. this returns me to the comments of nick lash, 
a catholic theologian, about the human tendency to attribute human-like qualities 
to god: god would hardly, surely, be god, if god proceeded, spoke, acted, behaved, 
like a human. there is little reason to imagine that god communicates in united 
nations-style memoranda and probably every reason to imagine that infinite degrees 
of interpretive work will always be necessary - and never enough - to discern god's 
plan and will. sunnis in their style of argument sometimes reach this place, and 
they work at times with the grain of the poetic and polysemic nature of the arabic 
quranic language. at the end of the 5-day kuttichira public debate, when offered 
his turn to present a summing up of the sunni case, sunni leader ap aboobecker 
musaliyar simply breaks into sung verse with absolutely no exegesis or discussion: 
he simply leaves the verse there for the audience to ponder. he thereby ruptures the 

22
court-room performance of modernist reasoned debate and offers instead a glimpse 
of ineffability, mystery and a power which is beyond reason. 

from wherever i am called
i can answer without my mouth.
those who travelled the right path
can be awarded paradise.

despite considerable technical complexity in sectarian debate, and despite the 
range of issues which divide traditionalists and reformists, in popular understand ing and in personal choice of alignment, it all tends to get stripped down to a single 
issue: does what sunnis do mean that they commit  shirk or is it misinterpreted as 
such by reformists? a complex discussion in the kuttichira debate about different 
types of help, the ultimate agency of god, what - if any - sort of power god gives 
to prophets, the differences between the living and dead, and so on, all eventually 
became flattened down to just one question: what is your intentionality when you tie 
a thread, go to a shrine, call upon a saint, see a thangal or so on?

in my discussions and interactions with kerala muslim laity, a range of issues 
are at stake in lay people's reasoning about their particular orientation - social 
class, modernity, education, family culture, aesthetics, human needs, how we must 
be/how we are different from hindus, how we are careful not to appear like idol 
worshippers, how people misinterpret what we are doing, and so on. in everyday 
life, people are (in varying degrees) aware of  ulema arguments and sometimes 
repeat them. but reformist ulema preoccupied with avoiding shirk also - in private 
interviews - frame the matter in terms of wider concerns. activists and lay people 
tightly affiliated with reformism, like the mass of muslims, also depart from scrip ture and reasoned debate in private discussion and interaction, and also draw upon, 
in making their own discussions and arguments about  shirk: social embarrassment; 
ethnic/class identity; preoccupations with what is modern; social hierarchies and 
status difference; a teleological understanding of religious enlightenment, such that 

 23 
spiritual maturity of the individual and of the community leads one to outgrow the 
need for reliance upon saint or shrine and towards an appreciation of  tauheed. the 
counter-arguments from activists and lay people affiliated with the sunni traditionalist faction deny accusations of shirk but also, and in a similar manner, draw upon . . . a 
wider rhetorical and practical background, such as: discourses of spirituality as per sonal; economies of power; an acknowledgement of the importance of embodied, 
aesthetic and affectual dispositions in faith practice; an insistence upon the irreducibility of a core `muslim' identity; moral evaluations of others' behaviour; intention ality as private and knowable only to god; god as merciful and comprehending of 
human weakness and needs.

even when ulema positions are brought out by the laity, as when jumailath scolds 
her young cousin for having visited a thangal and obtained a protective amulet, what 
is indexed by this practice, according to jumailath, is an insufficient commitment to 
making oneself clearly separate, as a muslim, from the hindu majority which sur rounds. the embodied practices of religion are certainly located within theological 
arguments but, crucially, they are also clearly rooted in concrete communities on the 
ground, and even if it is theologically perfectly possible to argue that muslim amu lets are not at all similar to hindu ones, in that the power therein derives from the 
one god and not some minor godling, or to visit a shrine with the intent of prayer 
to the one god and not to a saint housed there, still it is the superficial observable 
apparent similarity of such practice to hindu practice which makes it, for reformist 
laity like jumailath, dangerous and best avoided.8

 8  this has two aspects: firstly, while the position in the eyes of god of the other `people of the book' in 

islam is ambiguous, there is no such ambiguity towards `idol worshippers,' and one's contemporary 
hindu neighbours may dangerously evoke the pre-islamic pagans and idol worshippers so roundly 
excoriated in the quran; and secondly, there is the sociological fact of community difference and of 
being a beleagured minority in india, which encourages muslims to protect themselves and police 
themselves against assimilationism, communal violence and continual overtures by hindu activists to 
`re-convert' (hansen, 1999, 2007; mohsini, 2011; gayer, 2012).

24
performative communities
let me now make another comparative turn, by bringing in discussion of recent 
developments in christian theology; this will demonstrate that - as i am by now 
arguing - understanding all reasoning and action as framed in a performative mode 
does not - as one might imagine - weaken the ulema arguments, as they clearly fear 
by sticking publicly to `theology' and purging `context' out, nor does it in any way 
discredit ulema private discussions of the imperative to consider wider issues as mere 
`instrumentalism' on their part.

butler's work on the ways in which sex/gender works has been taken up amongst 
those interested in how religion works. ken stone offers a short and lucid exposition 
of butler's theory and how it is now being extended in contemporary theologies. 

butler's work explores the possibility that gender, rather than being conceived 
in a modernist fashion as the social interpretation of stable sexed bodies, is 
best understood in terms of collective practices that produce perceptions of 
fixed sexes and genders as performative effects. so too the bible, often con ceived as a fixed object, may be reconceptualised in terms of the collective 
practices, including conventional modes of scholarly and popular analysis, 
that produce perceptions of a single, stable bible as performative effects. 
martin argues forcefully that textual meaning is inseparable from herme neutics and interpretive rhetoric, which take place in specific contexts and 
under the influence of traditions and interpretive communities (religious 
and scholarly) . . . martin's argument [is] that notions about textual agency 
actually conceal readerly moves. (stone, 2008: 1) 

within christianity, out of this performative turn has emerged a new christian theology. there are some theologians who are not threatened by butlerian analysis, but are 
embracing it and trying to use its insights. armour, et al. (2006), bielo (2008), shults 
(2014), stone and many others note the contemporary re-imagining of biblical the ologies. "for biblical theologies, too, can be reimagined as performative enterprises" 
(stone, 2008: 11). the implications of this performative embrace of butlerian insights 
are that `scripture' here, refers not to some reality lying behind the text (whether in a 

 25 
reconstructed history or a reconstructed authorial intention), but rather to meanings 
reached or created "in the performance of scripture . . . in the enacting of scripture 
in particular practices" (dale martin, 2006, cited in stone, 2008: 2.) 

to understand how the critical, post-butlerian framework is being understood 
by some christian theologians not as threatening but as eventually allowing for a 
reinvigorated relationship to religion, let us turn again to stone, who lays out the 
extension of butler into religion as follows: 

i would like to consider the possibility that `bible' stands to `hermeneutics,' 
here, in something like the same way that `sex' stands to `gender' in conven tional modern ways of thinking the sex/gender distinction. on the one hand, 
there is a material entity, `the bible,' the existence of which is presupposed in 
much the same way that sexed bodies are presupposed under the rubric of 
the sex/gender distinction. on the other hand, there are what we imagine to 
be `expressions' of that entity - translations, versions, scholarly and popular 
accounts - which differ from one another in many ways but are nevertheless 
usually considered manifestations or interpretations of what is ultimately a 
substantive foundation in the bible. even as some diversity in interpretation is 
allowed, the assumed stability of the foundation is often used to limit proper 
expression . . . we might borrow butler's words . . . and - substituting `bible' 
for `gender' - reflect upon the possibility that, `the substantive effect of bible 
is performatively produced and compelled by regulatory practices of bible 
performance . . . bible is always a doing . . . there is no bible identity behind 
the expressions of bible; that identity is performatively constituted by the very 
`expressions' that are said to be its effects' . . . notice that i said `bible', here; and 
not, in this case, `the bible'. one implication of a performative account of bible 
may be that bible, like gender, is best understood as something other than a 
noun. bible, too, has more to do with doing than with being. (stone, 2008: 6)

those who are picking up performativity - be that in mainstream or in feminist, 
queer and other dissident theological circles - point out that, "textual meaning is 
inseparable from hermenutics and interpretive rhetoric, which take place in specific 

26
contexts and under the influence of traditions and interpretive communities reli gious and scholarly" (stone, 2008: 2). within islam, pluralism is well established and 
anticipated: irfan ahmad (2008) notes wryly how the same  sura is used by some to 
support communism and by maududi to rail against communism! famed contem porary scholars such as arkoun and soroush are working to call for `reformation' and 
insist upon the right to interpret from different grounds than those holding sway 
(soroush, 2000; arkoun, 2003). there is a gathering wave of female scholars working 
through processes of  ijtihad to challenge hegemonic and customary practice which 
claim islamic theological grounding (barlas, 2002; wudud, 1999; vatuk, 2013). while 
contemporary muslim theologians would perhaps not put it in these terms, argu ments from within islamic theology about contemporary practices of ijtihad are perfectly congruent with butler, in whose terms quran, as divine revelation, can never 
be apprehended directly; only `quran' - an apperception, approximation, interpretation, limited understanding, can ever be produced here on earth by humans. analysing the debates between sunnis and mujahids as performative events in a butlerian 
mode allows us to see not only how each group thereby produces itself as different 
from the other, but also to appreciate how each group is oriented towards a certain 
style or set of readerly moves in its own approach to quran and thereby produces its 
own `quran.'

if `quran' and `bible' (like `body' for butler) exist only through human apperception, interpretation, representation, and if religious texts (as bielo [2009] traces out) 
also structure and produce religious subjectivities in people, then firstly, there can 
never be a possibility of reaching a pure, authentic interpretation, and, secondly, 
all people whose religious subjectivities are produced through engagement and 
inter action with `quran' and `islam' are part of the process of producing `quran' and 
`islam.' new performative critics go much further, in seeking to lay bare the politics 
by which texts have been interpreted in certain directions and in refusing any notion 
at all of any possible authenticity, guarantee by way of a revelation of authorial intention or, sometimes, limits to potential future interpretive moves.

if the prospect of emerging feminist islamic theologies and queer islamic the ologies are too much - right now - for many to bear, just as liberation theologies, 

 27 
dalit theologies and queer christian theologies undoubtedly exist, but are, for 
some in the church, impossible to understand or accept (mosse, 2012), then per haps awad - himself a preacher and theologian of the national reformed synod of 
syria and lebanon - will give some comfort to them. awad strongly suggests that 
interpretation is not and can never be a free for all, but must continue to move 
carefully between the limits and constraints set by existing frameworks. yip (2005) 
delineates four strategies of re-reading islamic and christian texts among queer subjects, of which only one - the last - is a subjective `my meaning' positioning. lash   
himself - a sympathetic reader of performative theologies who is nonetheless firmly 
located within the roman catholic church - states unequivocally: "the emphasis on 
responsibility is emphatically not an encouragement to individualism - to myths of 
`my' meaning" (lash, 2007: 3). we are not then on the territory described by robert 
bellah in his `habits of the heart', with sheila-ism, or the faith which is held on to by 
sheila - a totally individualised, asocial and personally crafted mixture of christian 
and various new-age beliefs (2007). awad argues that martin luther would be in 
perfect agreement with contemporary roman catholic theologians who argue both 
that, "scripture can only function as norm if it is interpreted from within and in 
terms of the tradition" and that, on the other hand and at the same time, "clearly, 
the authority of tradition does not derive from tradition itself, but from scripture 
and also from god", even as they argue that "both [ traditio and  scriptura] are pri marily dependent on god's spirit" (2008: 69). concluding, awad insists that sciptura 
and traditio are always, in catholic and protestant streams alike, in a circular rela tion of mutual exegesis and support. he urges theologians, in their enthusiasm for 
the performative turn, to understand that such a turn does not necessarily entail an 
abandonment of scripture, and is not, as he claims it is sometimes being understood, 
an `about turn' towards the pure grounds of `community', such that any community 
can claim the right to interpret texts or adopt practices, in their own way, as heir and 
performers of, and rightful innovators within, a particular `tradition'. he asks us to 
work with a triangle, coming close (i note) to a peircian semiotics, in which we have 
the referent; the signified; the signifier; and the interpretant, and in which `inter pretant', the particular person who is hearing or reading a signifier, is given weight.  

28
the material-social circumstances of any utterance become not a sidelined `context' 
but an intrinsic part of the meaning making (peirce, 1991).

conclusion
butlerian readings of religion understand that structures (texts, traditions, commu nities) exist which demand coherence and `readability' in the subjects which they 
produce. the particular subjectivities which emerge must always signify to others 
and not merely to an individual; there is an imperative towards readability to others 
of any particular `quran'. as butler points out, the demands of iterability and citability do also tend to buttress existing tendencies, referring as they do to already com pleted successful performances, past citations and previous copies; at the same time, 
the continued production of the abjected `outside' and the inevitable imbrication 
of power in practices of citation make it highly likely that feminist, queer and other 
theological strands being produced by minorities will not easily move into the centre 
as acceptable `copies' of that `original' which can never be grasped/does not actually 
exist. what is relegated to the outside, as abject, rejected (for butler, the `bodies that 
do not matter', such as the bodies of trans people), then produces the ones that do 
matter, the normative, the hegemonic, the ones allowed pride of place at the centre. 
as stone suggests: "the bibles produced in the . . . theologies of eichrodt, von rad, 
and brueggemann are clearly different from one another, and different yet again 
from that found in the work of . . . childs. each of these produces an `intelligible' 
bible that matters, which also relies on its particular constitutive outside" (stone, 
2008: 11). dissident communities like anarca-muslims (veneuse, 2014) or the queer 
subjects discussed by yip all produce (at the moment) `qurans' which, from the point 
of view of the mainstream, decidedly do not `matter' (yip, 2005, 2007). 

of course, one might expect many theologians to resist the performative turn 
and understanding of what they are engaged in doing. embracing a performative 
theological understanding opens up even more radical possibilities for interpreta tion and practice than does the by-now very well-rehearsed argument that greater 
exposure and islamic knowledge democratises processes of  ijtihad (e.g. huq, 2008; 
mirza, 2008; vatuk, 2013). crucially, the performative turn disempowers religious 

 29 
specialists by placing them within the same space in relation to critique as nonspecialists, and insists that all critique and commentary is inevitably immanent. 
while some might be tempted to dismiss such commentators as amina wadud - the 
african american muslim revert who has controversially led mixed prayers (wadud, 
1999) - as so far removed from global mainstreams of ulema thinking as to be hardly 
worth engaging with, or as insufficiently scholarly in the presentation of her argu ments, a performative understanding of theology would offer her a place at the 
table; not as part of a `discursive tradition' (asad, 1986), where she would continue 
to be judged on the `authenticity' of her contribution to the conversation, but as a 
practising `muslim' woman who has around her many other `muslims', willing and 
wanting to follow her lead in their practice and understanding of a core sacred text, 
hence as leader of a performative community which is structured and produced by 
a `quran', and as interpreter of `quran' from a particular point of view - which is as 
valid as any other consensual community's situated interpretation9. 

i conclude by coming full circle here, reiterating that within muslim tradi tions, quran and  hadith as ultimate authority are supported by the methods of 
qiyas - analogy - and considerations of ijma - the consensus of the community. in 
the summing up speech for the kerala traditionalists, their leader moves between 
rational-legal discourse of proposition and proof, the chanting of a mystical passage, 
and a reference to  ijma. esack (1997) points out that "believers as far back and as 
authoritative as `ali ibn ali talib, mohammed's cousin and son-in-law, advised that, 
`the quran does not speak with a tongue; it needs interpreters and interpreters are 
people' " (esack, 1993, 1997: 50). arkoun (2003) makes the same point. a performative understanding of religion is perhaps then already anticipated in the islamic 
tradition, unlike the christian tradition which had been restrained for so long by a 
narrow focus upon either  scriptura or  traditio (as handed down from church hier archy) - with the third pole of `community consensus' hidden from sight and not 
often acknowledged and only recently - as dalit, queer and feminist theologies 

 9  this would also have interesting implications for the way in which groups such as the ahmadiya sect 

are understood.

30
emerge and come of age - becoming recognised as a proper and legitimate part of 
processes of interpretation. in the 21st century, the gates of  ijtihad are open; but, 
more than this, the appreciation of embeddedness which was long held within and 
preserved within muslim traditions is struggling its way into wider recognition. 

competing interests
the author declares that they have no competing interests.

references
ahmad, a  2010 explanation is not the point: domestic work, islamic dawa and 

becoming muslim in kuwait.  \gamma \delta \theta  \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \upsilon \sigma \phi \pi \psi \phi  \omega fffiflffi\sigma ffl ffi \lambda ffij\delta flff`fffflff'^, 11(3-4): 
293-310.
ahmad, i  2008 cracks in the `mightiest fortress': jamaat-e-islami's changing dis course on women. modern asian studies, 42(2-3): 549-575.
ahmad, i  2009  *\xi ffl\sigma _\pi \xi _ \sigma ffi* *\theta _ff\phi fl\sigma \phi ^ \pi ffi *ffi*\pi \sigma , j\delta \theta  jfl\sigma ffi\xi ifffl_\sigma j\pi ffffi ffi \omega \sigma _\sigma \sigma jss\theta ss

islami. princeton, nj: princeton university press.
alam, a 2008 the enemy within: madrasa and muslim identity in north india. modern asian studies, 42(2-3): 605-627.
arkoun, m 2003 rethinking islam today.  \gamma \delta \theta  \lambda ffiffi\sigma ffl\xi  ffi j\delta \theta  \lambda _\theta fl\pi \phi \sigma ffi \lambda \phi \sigma *\theta _^ ffi

political and social science , 588(1): 18-39. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 
0002716203588001003
armour, e t and st ville, s m (eds.) 2006 bodily citations: religion and judith butler. 

new york: columbia university press.
asad, t 1986 \gamma \delta \theta  **\theta \sigma  ffi \sigma ffi \lambda ffij\delta flff`fffflff'^ ffi *\xi ffl\sigma _ae georgetown university center for 

contemporary arab studies. pmid: 3475539.
ayres, l  2006  oe\pi \phi \sigma \theta \sigma  \sigma ffi* \pi j\xi  ffl\theta '\sigma \phi ^, \sigma ffi \sigma ``flff\sigma \phi \delta  jff ifffiflj\delta ss\phi \theta ffijfifl^ jfl\pi ffi\pi j\sigma fl\pi \sigma ffi 

theology. oxford: oxford university press.
barlas, a 2002 believing women. *\xi ffl\sigma _, o/ffifl\theta \sigma *\pi ffi' `\sigma jfl\pi \sigma fl\phi \delta \sigma ffl \pi ffij\theta fl`fl\theta j\sigma j\pi ffffi\xi  ffi j\delta \theta 

qur'an, pp. 361-368.
bellah, e and  robert, n et al 2007  ae\sigma oe\pi j\xi  ffi j\delta \theta  \delta \theta \sigma flj, *ffi*\pi o/\pi *fi\sigma ffl\pi \xi _ \sigma ffi* \phi ff__\pi j-

_\theta ffij \pi ffi \lambda _\theta fl\pi \phi \sigma ffi ffl\pi i\theta . oakland, ca: university of california press.

 31 
bielo, j s  2008 on the failure of `meaning': bible reading in the anthropology of 

christianity.  culture and religion,  9(1): 1-21. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 
14755610801954839
bielo, j s 2009 \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi  \pi \sigma \delta \upsilon  \phi \psi \omega  ff\delta \theta \lambda fi fl\upsilon  \omega \phi \psi \upsilon \delta ffi\theta ffl\sigma \psi i \delta j \omega `ffl\upsilon ffi\omega '^*ffl' ffi\theta \delta \pi \sigma  _^*'\omega  \xi \phi \pi \lambda i. 

new york: new york university press.
blank, j  2001  ,\pi ''ffl\psi \xi  \delta \upsilon  \phi \psi \omega  ssffl^\upsilon j\theta fflss\omega fi ae\xi 'fflss ffl\upsilon \lambda  ss\delta \lambda \omega \theta \upsilon ^\phi i fflss\delta \upsilon ffi \phi \psi \omega  oeffl\pi \lambda ^

bohras. chicago: university of chicago press.
burrus, v and rebecca, l 2010 shifting the focus of history. in: burrus, v (ed.) late 

ancient christianity. minneapolis, mn: fortress press. pmcid: pmc2923494.
caputo, j d1997 o/\psi \omega  \sigma \theta ffli\omega \theta \xi  ffl\upsilon \lambda  \phi \omega ffl\theta \xi  \delta j aeffl*oe\pi \omega \xi  oe\omega \theta \theta ^\lambda fflfi o/\omega '^ffi^\delta \upsilon  ff^\phi \psi \delta \pi \phi  \theta \omega '^ffi^\delta \upsilon . 

bloomington, in: indiana university press.
cherbonnier, e la b 1953 the theology of the word of god. o/\psi \omega  ae\delta \pi \theta \upsilon ffl' \delta j o/\omega '^ffi^\delta \upsilon , 

33(1): 16-30. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/484361
coleman, s  1996 words as things language, aesthetics and the objectification of 

protestant evangelicalism.  ae\delta \pi \theta \upsilon ffl' \delta j ,ffl\phi \omega \theta ^ffl' \pi '\phi \pi \theta \omega !  1(1): 107-128. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/135918359600100106
coleman, s  2008 the abominations of anthropology: christianity, ethnographic 

taboos and the meanings of science. in: pine, f & de pina-cabral, j (eds.)  on the 
ssffl\theta ffi^\upsilon \xi  \delta j \theta \omega '^ffi^\delta \upsilon . oxford: berghahen books, pp. 39-58.
coleman, s 2013 afterword: de-exceptionalising islam. in: marsden, m & retsikas, k  

(eds.) articulating islam: anthropological approaches to muslim worlds. dordrecht: 
springer, pp. 247-258.
csordas, t j 2007 global religion and the re-enchantment of the world: the case of 

the catholic charismatic renewal.  anthropological theory, 7(3): 295-314. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1463499607080192
das, v  1984 for a folk-theology and theological anthropology of islam.  contribution to indian sociology delhi , 18(2): 293-300. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1177/006996678401800208
de munck, v  2005 islamic orthodoxy and sufism in sri lanka.  anthropos, 100(2): 

401-414.

32
esack, f 1993 qur'anic hermeneutics: problems and prospects.  the muslim world , 

83(2): 118-141. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-1913.1993.tb03571.x
esack, f 1997 \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \upsilon \phi \psi \omega \theta \xi ff\phi fi\pi  \xi \pi fl ffi\upsilon \delta \theta \xi \upsilon \phi fflij \xi \pi  `ffl\upsilon \xi i\phi ' ffi\omega \theta fflffi\omega 'ff\phi ^\omega  fi* \phi \pi ff\omega \theta \theta \omega \upsilon \phi _\phi fi\delta ffl

solidarity against oppression. oxford: oneworld.
ewing, k p 1994 dreams from a saint: anthropological atheism and the temptation 

to believe.  american anthropologist , 96(3): 571-583. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1525/aa.1994.96.3.02a00080
ewing, k p 1997 arguing sainthood: modernity, psychoanalysis, and islam . durham, 

nc: duke university press.
gayer, l  and  christophe, j  (eds.) 2012  *\delta ffl\upsilon \phi iffl \phi \pi  `\pi fl\phi \xi \pi  ,\phi ff\phi \omega fflj ss\theta \xi ae\omega 'fffi\theta \phi \omega ffl fi* 

marginalisation. new york: columbia university press.
george awad, n  2008 should we dispense with sola scriptura? scripture, tradi tion and postmodern theology.  dialog, 47(1): 64-79. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1111/j.1540-6385.2008.00368.x
hansen, t b 2007 the india that does not shine. isim review, 19(1): 50-51.
hanson, r and patrick, c 2005 ssoe\omega  ffl\omega \xi \theta 'oe *fi\theta  ffoe\omega  ,oe\theta \phi fflff\phi \xi \pi  o/fi'ff\theta \phi \pi \omega  fi* aefiflj ffoe\omega  oe\theta \phi \xi \pi 

controversy 318-381 ad. london: a&c black (originally published in 1988).
hirschkind, c 2006  the ethical soundscape: cassette sermons and islamic counter publics. new york: columbia university press.
ho, e  2006  ssoe\omega  _\theta \xi ^\omega ffl fi* ss\xi \theta \phi ij _\omega \pi \omega \xi \upsilon fi_o/ \xi \pi fl ifi\psi \phi \upsilon \phi ffo/ \xi '\theta fifflffl ffoe\omega  `\pi fl\phi \xi \pi  '\omega \xi \pi .  

vol. 3. oakland, ca:  university of california press.  doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1525/california/9780520244535.001.0001
huq, m 2008 reading the qur'an in bangladesh: the politics of `belief' among islamist women. modern asian studies, 42(2-3): 457-488.
joy, e 2013 this is not my (or, our) time, so please take ecstasy with me: the necessity of 

generous reading. available at: http://www.inthemedievalmiddle.com/2013/12/
this-is-not-my-or-our-time-so-please.html (last accessed february 2015). 
keane, w  2008 the evidence of the senses and the materiality of religion.  jour\pi \xi \upsilon  fi* ffoe\omega  !fio/\xi \upsilon  oe\pi ffoe\theta fiffifi\upsilon fi_\phi '\xi \upsilon  `\pi fflff\phi ff\delta ff\omega \sigma  14(s1): s110-s127. doi: http://dx.doi.

org/10.1111/j.1467-9655.2008.00496.x

 33 
king, u 2002 essay. is there a future for religious studies as we know it? some postmodern, feminist, and spiritual challenges.  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \delta \upsilon  \phi \psi \omega  fffi\omega \lambda flffi\pi \xi  ffffi\pi ffl\omega fii \delta \upsilon 
religion, 70(2): 365-388. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jaar/70.2.365
kresse, k 2007 philosophising in mombasa: knowledge, islam and intellectual practice on the swahili coast. edinburgh, edinburgh university press.
lash, n  2007 `performing scripture'. lash, interviewed in christian century,   

11 december, pp. 30-35. available at : http://www.religion-online.org/showarticle. 
asp?title=3479 (last accessed february 2015). 
latour, b  2010 an attempt at a `compositionist manifesto.'  new literary history , 

41(3): 471-490.
mahmood, s  2006 secularism, hermeneutics, and empire: the politics of islamic 

reformation. public culture, 18(2): 323.
mahmood, s 2008 is critique secular? a symposium at uc berkeley.  public culture, 

20(3): 447-452. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1215/08992363-2008-004
mahmood, s 2009 religious reason and secular affect: an incommensurable divide? 

critical inquiry, 35(4): 836-862. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/599592
mayaram, s  1997  j\omega `fl`\phi fl\xi ' \lambda \omega 'flfi\omega `^ fii\phi \psi * fi\omega fi\delta \lambda i* \pi \xi ffl \phi \psi \omega  `\psi \pi _fl\xi ' \delta \upsilon  \pi  *\theta `\sigma flfi

identity. new york: oxford university press.
meneses, e et al. 2014 engaging the religiously committed other: anthropologists 

and theologians in dialogue. current anthropology, 55(1): 82-104. doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1086/674716
metcalf, b d  1982 islamic revival in british india: deoband, 1860-1900 . princeton, 

nj: princeton university press. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/9781400856107
mirza, q 2008 islamic feminism & gender equality. isim review, 21(2): 30-31.
mohsini, m 2011 engagement and disengagement from the margins: perceptions 

of the state by urban muslim artisans in india.  contemporary south asia, 19(3): 
281-296. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09584935.2011.594159
mosse, d 2012  the saint in the banyan tree: christianity and caste society in india .  

vol. 14. oakland, ca: university of california press. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1525/california/9780520253162.001.0001

34
naples, n a  and  barbara, g 2013 feminist empiricism and standpoint theory. in: 

hesse-biber, s (ed.) feminist research practice. london: sage, pp. 14-41.
osella, f  and  caroline, o  2008a introduction: islamic reformism in south asia. 

modern asian studies, 42(2-3): 247-257.
osella, f and caroline, o 2008b islamism and social reform in kerala, south india. 

modern asian studies, 42(2-3): 317-346.
peirce, c s 1991  peirce on signs: writings on semiotic . chapel hill, nc: university of 

north carolina press.
pope john paul ii  ut unum sint. avialble at:  http://w2.vatican.va/content/johnpaul-ii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_jp-ii_enc_25051995_ut-unum-sint.htm 
(last accessed february 2015).
rao, a 2004 debating religious practice in cyberspace: lived and antinomian identities in a kashmiri muslim community. in: ahmad, i & helmut, r (eds.) lived islam 
\gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \upsilon \phi \gamma \psi \omega  \psi ff\psi fi\pi \psi \pi \gamma \lambda \delta fl \psi ffiffi\lambda fflffl\lambda ff\psi \pi \gamma \lambda \delta fl \psi \delta ff ffi\lambda \delta i\gamma ffi\pi . oxford: berghahn books.
ricci, r 2011 j\phi `\psi ffl \pi '\psi \delta \phi `\psi \pi ^ff\omega  *\gamma \pi ^'\psi \pi \xi '^fl ffi\lambda \delta _^'\phi \gamma \lambda \delta fl \psi \delta ff \pi \sigma ^ \upsilon '\psi *\gamma ffi ffi\lambda \phi ffl\lambda fi\lambda `\gamma \phi  \lambda , \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma 

and southeast asia. chicago: university of chicago press. doi: http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.7208/chicago/9780226710907.001.0001
robinson, f  1993 technology and religious change: islam and the impact of 

print. modern asian studies , 27(01): 229-251. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
s0026749x00016127
robinson, f  2008 islamic reform and modernities in south asia.  modern asian  

studies, 42(2-3): 259-281.
sedgwick, e k 1997 paranoid reading and reparative reading, or, you're so paranoid, you 

probably think this introduction is about you (1997). in: sedgwick, e k (ed.) introduc\pi \gamma \lambda \delta  \lambda , \delta \lambda _^` ss\psi ae\gamma \delta ss\omega  oe\xi ^^' '^\psi ff\gamma \delta ss\phi  \gamma \delta  o/ffi\pi \gamma \lambda \delta . durham, nc: duke university press.
shults, f l r et al. 2014. jffi\lambda \delta \lambda ffi`\psi \phi \pi \gamma ffi \pi \sigma ^\lambda `\lambda ssae\omega  oe\gamma ``^\phi  o/^`^\xi ae^ \psi \delta ff \pi \sigma ^ \phi ^ffi'^\pi \gamma \lambda \delta  \lambda , \psi \pi \sigma ^-

ism. edinburgh: edinburgh university press. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.3366/ 
edinburgh/9780748684137.001.0001
soroush, a, mahmoud s and  ahmad, s 2000  ^\psi \phi \lambda \delta fl ,'^^ff\lambda fflfl \psi \delta ff ff^ffl\lambda ffi'\psi ffiae \gamma \delta 

j\phi `\psi ffl\omega  !\phi \phi ^\delta \pi \gamma \psi ` "'\gamma \pi \gamma \delta ss\phi  \lambda , \upsilon *ff\lambda `#\psi '\gamma ffl \theta \lambda '\lambda \xi \phi \sigma . oxford: oxford university press.

 35 
stausberg, m 2010 distinctions, differentiations, ontology, and non-humans in theories of religion. \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi  \sigma  \upsilon \lambda \delta \xi \phi \psi  \omega ff \theta \lambda \delta  fi\theta fl\pi \psi  \xi ffi ffl\delta i\omega j\omega \xi ff, 22(4): 354-374. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/157006810x531139
stone, k 2008 bibles that matter: biblical theology and queer performativity. biblical 

\upsilon \lambda \delta \xi i\xi j\psi  `flii\delta \theta \omega ff' ^ *\xi fl\phi ff_i \xi ffi `\omega *i\delta  _ff\pi  \upsilon \lambda \delta \xi i\xi j\psi , 38(1): 14-25.
strathern, m 2005 partial connections. lanham, md: rowman altamira.
swanson, m n  2005a the trinity in christian-muslim conversation.  dialog, 44(3): 

256-263. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0012-2033.2005.00266.x
swanson, m n  2005b on the teaching of islam at luther seminary.  teaching 

\upsilon \lambda \delta \xi i\xi j\psi  \sigma  ffl\delta i\omega j\omega \xi ff, 8(3): 172-175. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-

9647.2005.00241.x
tohidi, n 2013 "islamic feminism": perils and promises. in: middle eastern women on  

the move. washington, dc: woodrow wilson international center for scholars,   
pp. 135-146.
van der veer, p  1992 playing or praying: a sufi saint's day in surat.  the  

*\xi fl\phi ff_i \xi ffi ^,\omega _ff fi\theta fl\pi \omega \delta ,, 51(03): 545-564. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/ 

10.2307/2057949
vatuk, s 2013 islamic feminism in india: indian muslim women activists and the 

reform of muslim personal law. in: osella, f & osella c (eds.)  ss,i_ae\omega oe \phi \delta ffi\xi \phi ae \omega ff
south asia. cambridge: cambridge university press.
veneuse, m j  2014 the body of the condemned, sally: paths to queering anarcaislam. adcs, 1.
visvanathan, s  1999  \upsilon \lambda \delta  o/\lambda \phi \omega ,\theta \omega _ff, \xi ffi ae\delta \phi _i_' oe\omega ,\theta \xi \phi \psi o/ *\delta i\omega \delta ffio/ _ff\pi  \phi \omega \theta fl_i _ae\xi ffj 

the yakoba . oxford: oxford university press. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ 
acprof:oso/9780195647990.001.0001
viveiros de castro, e 2004 perspectival anthropology and the method of cont rolled 

equivocation. \upsilon \omega \omega \theta !' *\xi fl\phi ff_i \xi ffi \theta \lambda \delta  fi\xi oe\omega \delta \theta \psi  ffi\xi \phi  \theta \lambda \delta  ^ff\theta \lambda \phi \xi \xi i\xi j\psi  \xi ffi "\xi #i_ff\pi  fi\xi fl\theta \lambda 
america, 2(1): 1.
voll, j o  1994 islam as a special world-system.  *\xi fl\phi ff_i \xi ffi $\xi \phi i\pi  oe\omega ,\theta \xi \phi \psi , 5(2):  

213-226.

2
two contributions by the then-editor of  graham's magazine, edgar allan poe (`the 
masque of red death' and the second part of his review of nathaniel hawthorne's 
twice-told tales), make the may 1842 edition of the journal, arguably,  one of the 
most influential publications in the history of the anglo-american short story. in 
`the masque of the red death' poe (1982) presented his readers with a fantasti cal prose narrative in which the `happy and dauntless and sagacious' prince of an 
unnamed kingdom controls and manipulates his subjects through an elaborate 
coup de the'a^tre, `a masked ball of the most unusual magnificence' that goes on for 
five months. prince prospero has all the `knights and dames of his court' dance endlessly within `the deep seclusion of one of his castellated abbeys', while a bloody 
`pestilence' rages through the world outside (poe, 1982: 269). the conclusion is, of 
course, both inevitable and extremely famous: the walls are breached, `[a]nd dark ness and decay and the red death held illimitable dominion over all' (poe, 1982: 
273). at play in the tale are two competing forms of power. first, is prospero's vision 
of an elite order, reliant upon his belief in the sanctity and impenetrability of both 
his artistic creation and his own physical body. the second is that of the narrator, 
whose unimpeded movement and unbridled access are paralleled by the reach of 
the red death itself and raise the spectre of a panoptic vision that disrupts pub lic/private distinctions by opening up the walls of the castle and the bodies of its 
inhabitants. in this article i will show how poe's tale can be read as a dramatisa tion of concerns about the rising threat of elite, capitalist control in the publish ing industry embodied in contemporary tensions over transatlantic copyright leg islation and authorship. in particular, poe's tale in  graham's reflects a moment of 
international tension around dickens's 1842 tour when the famous author used 
his celebrity to push for british-style copyright legislation in the us. i will show 
how this move was interpreted by critics of copyright in light of the history of intellectual property disputes and `artisan republicanism' between the us and britain 
before demonstrating how this moment impacted upon the writing of poe's tale. 
to do this it is worth beginning by outlining some of the more influential critical 
responses to `the masque of the red death'.

 3 

in recent years, the tale has been out of vogue. lacking any character develop ment, largely focused on description and containing few instances of dialogue, the 
story invites readings that see it more as a finger exercise than a fully formed nar rative performance. in attempting to account for the story's heavy-handed narra tion and highly wrought style, new critical readings have predominated, as scholars 
have often looked inwardly to poe's own oeuvre for explanation. in particular, kermit 
vanderbilt's 1968 formalist reading of the tale as poe's attempt to give `fictional 
expression to the esthetic [sic] ideas he had been formulating' (vanderbilt in may, 
1991: 145) on the importance of `the effect' has been deeply influential for genera tions of readers. indeed, it has had a surprisingly long pedigree, even in the face of 
poststructuralist and reader-response challenges to the new critical focus on close 
reading and the autonomy of the artist. vanderbilt's reading reflects new critical 
concerns with aesthetic and authorial autonomy through its connection of `the 
masque' with another poe story `the domain of arnheim or the landscape garden' 
by focusing upon their shared attention to romantic themes of how `the artist's superior taste. . . reorders matter and form' (vanderbilt in may, 1991:  146). more specifically, vanderbilt's approach to the text sought to demonstrate how prospero serves   
as a hyperbolic surrogate for poe himself: a monstrous, gothic character that overextends the artist's aesthetic theories beyond the bounds of rationality. however, 
in this article i will show that the work reaches outside the closed confines of the 
merely literary to speak directly to the time and place of its composition. by considering the work within the context of its first appearance in the may issue of graham's, 
it can actually be seen as a subtly-conceived study of the shaping influence exerted 
upon mid-nineteenth-century transatlantic literary culture by class, spectacle, access 
and control. i particularly wish to draw attention to the importance of the fact that 
the may 1842 issue of graham's appeared in the middle of charles dickens's famous, 
and controversial, trip to the united states. arguably the main event in american 
literary life during the first half of that year, the visit of the popular british author to 
the us triggered an explosion of american expressive culture that was the apotheosis 
of a broader trend in antebellum print described by isabelle as a `carnival on the page' 

4
(isabelle, 2000: 4). before returning to the story it is worth exploring the context of 
dickens's visit. 

in order to satisfy the seemingly limitless desire of american readers for descriptions of dickens and his wife, his clothes, and his travel plans, antebellum newspa pers and periodicals at the time of dickens's trip underwent gothic transformations 
of their own that were strangely redolent of the corporeal disfigurements poe attributed to the red death. publications swelled monstrously with additional copy, and, 
like the `profuse bleeding at the pores' (poe, 1982: 269) that follows the contraction 
of poe's fictional plague, faced a possible `dissolution' of their own as they spent 
vast sums on commissioning innumerable literary `extras' and lavish illustrations of 
the englishman's opulent lodgings. journalists from all walks of life were gripped 
by description frenzy. they scrambled over one another to gain access to him and 
offer their accounts to their readership, who then penned bulky letters to the editors 
of periodicals describing their own experiences. in celebrating dickens during the 
winter and spring of 1842 antebellum print culture performed `a collective specta cle, in which producers and consumers, publishers and readers, came to participate' 
(lehuu, 2000: 3). indeed, dickens became what in ritual terms would be labelled a 
fetish or effigy; a hypertrophic manifestation of unreconciled social tensions. poe's 
tale mirrored this climate of expressive excess through its depiction of a world that 
outwardly has all the trappings of a renaissance courtly masque and in which politics 
and art are united through `a multitude of gaudy and fantastic appearances' (poe, 
1982: 270).

as meredith mcgill has shown, at the same time as antebellum readers were 
experiencing the collective hysteria known popularly as `the boz excitement' dickens 
himself was attempting to assert greater control over his publications by garnering 
`support [for] the passage of an international copyright law' (mcgill, 2003: 76) that 
would render all his creations the product and sole possession of his singular and 
inviolate intellect. such a law, dickens reasoned, would have shored-up the textual 
authority of the printed word by identifying him as the author of works that were 
widely reproduced and disseminated in the us without prior agreement or, more 

 5 
significantly, payment. while for contemporary critics the right of a writer to be identified as an `author' is largely assumed, in the mid-nineteenth century the question of 
what an author was, and their rights under that title, was questioned frequently. as 
peter jaszi and martha woodmansee have noted:

[t]he modern regime of authorship, far from being timeless and universal, is 
a relatively recent formation - the result of a quite radical reconceptualiza tion of the creative process that culminated less than 200 years ago in the 
heroic self-presentation of romantic poets. as they saw it, genuine author ship is originary in the sense that it results not in a variation, an imitation, 
or an adaptation. . . but in an utterly new, unique. . . work which, accordingly, 
may be said to be the property of its creator and to merit the law's protection 
as such. (jaszi and woodmansee, 1994: 3)

dickens's mission to bring conceptions of authorship and legality framed by british 
romanticism across the atlantic was a controversial one. for critics of international 
copyright his appeals were tantamount to the suppression of the growing american 
print industry, which relied upon a lack of protection for authors. as peter baldwin 
has noted, `in nineteenth-century america, copyright was altogether a hard sell. . . 
[s]trong rights for authors and publishers were regarded as old world monopolies, 
thwarting the educational aspirations of a fledgling democracy' (baldwin, 2014: 83). 
the aim of dickens's tour was perceived by certain sectors as therefore both elitist 
and imperialistic in nature. in fact, to critics of international copyright in the jack sonian us his plan was a morally dubious attempt to galvanise publishing elites to 
support a mission that would personally enrich the english author at the expense 
of the us people. the year of his trip to the us was also the year in which british 
parliament was debating an extension of the 25 year term of copyright granted to 
authors in 1814, leading dickens to believe, albeit with considerable scepticism, 
that he might be able to win support for his position in the us. as jessica despain 
has noted, `[t]he debate over copyright was still ongoing when a new british law 

6
was passed in 1842, partly at the urging of william wordsworth. . . [t]he copyright 
act of 1842 extended author's right throughout their lifetime, plus seven years' 
(despain, 2014: 5), whilst also granting protections to authors over `rights to representation': dramatic performances of their textual works. in attempting to establish 
an international copyright law, dickens was seeking to extend the authority of a 
british legal tradition of copyright beyond the physical borders of the british state, 
and into the sovereign territory of the united states, and so secure for himself 
a greater share of capital from the american book trade. like prince prospero in 
poe's story, whose `gates of iron. . . leave means neither of ingress nor egress to the 
sudden impulses of despair or frenzy' (poe, 1982: 269), dickens sought to shore up 
and constrain the boundaries of his fictional worlds within the unruly nineteenth 
century literary marketplace by summoning all his `hale and light-hearted friends 
from among the knights and dames' (poe, 1982: 269), the publishing elite of us 
society, to his side. 

however, dickens's controversial strategy caused an aggressive counterattack 
from the popular press as his attempts to exert control over the use of his fictional 
creations ultimately precipitated another, more pressing, need to restrict access to 
himself and his private life. in american notes dickens speaks of the popular press's 
techniques of reportage as a cruel, low, form of entertainment; failing to note the 
political value of the jacksonian penny press, and focusing only on its financial benefit to the publishers: 

what are the fifty newspapers, which those precocious urchins are bawling 
down the street, and which are kept filed within, what are they but amuse ments?. . . [d]ealing in round abuse and blackguard names; pulling off the 
roofs of private houses, as the halting devil did in spain; pimping and pan dering for all degrees of vicious taste, and gorging with coined lines the most 
voracious maw; imputing to every man in public life the coarsest and vilest 
motives; scaring away from the stabbed and prostrate body-politic, every 
samaritan of clear conscience and good deeds. (dickens, 1842: 210-211) 

 7 
dickens's equation of the new york press with the halting devil (an alternative name 
for the daemon asmodeus from judeo-christian folklore who was a common figure 
in eighteenth-century french and spanish satire) speaks to his fear about the possi bilities of unregulated american capitalism to turn the reading public into consum ers of `the coarsest and vilest' content. 

by the spring of 1842, dickens's tour had become a farcical drama of power, which 
was daily played out in the popular press. day by day his attempts to control access to 
private details of his life and plans became increasingly more desperate as journalists 
upped their efforts to expose the writer to the public gaze. as despain has noted, 
`dickens's critique of the homogenizing effects of mass culture indicate that it was 
the press's decentralization that most worried him. . . americans were reading variant 
versions of the same stories without a central voice controlling' (despain, 2014: 18).  
in other words, dickens was deeply concerned that multiple editions of literary 
works made available by means of unauthorised reprinting did not lead to a plural ity of argument called for by a democracy, but, rather, a homogenisation of thought. 
what was lacking, dickens felt, was a certain elite, intellectual oversight controlling 
the operations of the american press. consequently, dickens's wish for greater con trol over the distribution of his printed texts and public persona resonated within 
emerging structures of class and status in antebellum society that were turning dis putes over literary copyright into a battle between the exercise of elite control and 
jacksonian, working-class, traditions of abundance and free use with roots in the 
radical publishing practices of the american revolution. for many in the new republic it was imperative to the successful operation of the state that texts be readily available and cheap. this was especially true when it came to british literature, which, 
due to the shared language and history, was perceived as the common possession of 
both nations. the rapid availability of american editions of british works like those 
of dickens that were made possible by the lack of regulation for copyright allowed 
american citizens who were geographically separate from europe to cheaply con sume prestigious european literary products. indeed, one of the prevailing forms of 
nationalism in the us at this time depended upon maintaining ties with europe that 

8
would allow for the continuation of a transatlantic, republican culture of mutual critique that had given birth to the revolution. if the us was to be able to present itself 
as an equal of britain in the nineteenth century (and not as its infant son or backward 
dependent) then it had to maintain a speed of access and availability to literary material. such speed and availability would not have been possible had editions of british 
texts been issued from only one or two transatlantic publishing houses at a single 
moment decided upon by the author and publisher. this was especially true in the 
1830s and 1840s when a unified national rail-system and large-scale factory production of books, that would have allowed for a distribution of texts rapid enough to 
meet demand, was only just beginning to emerge in the nation. 

more than this, though, control over copyright was often received by jacksonian 
americans as a form of elite privilege that was hazardous to the american demo cratic public. this was because there remained in the us a concern with the effect 
copyright might have in leading the country away from the ideals of amateur vol unteerism, which jefferson and others had seen as essential to the national goal of 
establishing a republic of independent, freethinking artisans, and towards a culture 
industry organised and orchestrated out of municipal centres by cabals of profes sional capitalists. murmuring under the surface of anti-copyright activism was the 
violent history of what sean wilentz called `artisan republicanism' (1984: 17); the 
attempts of tradesmen to retain their independence and uphold the values of the 
apprenticeship system, which, in the book publishing business, meant opposing 
large monopolies and conglomerates that would control the flow of intellectual 
property in the us. indeed, the very logic of apprenticeship is based around the 
legitimacy of copying from existing models. importantly, anti-copyright in the us 
was not, then, wholly an anti-capitalist enterprise (although this was one aspect), 
but one directed to the protection of smaller, independent publishers rather than 
the extension of the rights of authors or corporate monopolies. the recent memo ries of artisan republicans were rich with instances in which british manufactur ers had tried to gain substantial footholds in the us. one of the more aggressive 
had been the british use of closed market ` auctions [my italics] as conduits for the 

 9 
american market, to save themselves time and expense and to sell off their sur pluses as quickly as possible' (wilentz, 1984: 150) that had been a site of regular 
contestation since the end of the war of 1812. these auctions excluded american 
craftsmen and enflamed class, national and labour tensions in the city. for artisan 
republican tradespeople and printers, at worst, a transatlantic copyright agreement 
might mean that british editions of books (potentially printed more cheaply in the 
uk where industrialisation had already developed to a larger scale than in the us) 
would flood the american market at great hazard to native printers. what drove 
much of the print-public sphere in the us (at least until after the civil war) was 
not a logic centred upon the rights of the individual author, but the public's right 
to benefit from the distribution and availability of literary material even if it was 
obtained through semi-legal, or even piratical, channels. such piracy (or reprint ing) was commonplace and even occurred with texts produced by us authors. the 
founding fathers madison and pinckney had attempted to negotiate between public rights and authorial copyright by imposing an embargo period on reprinting in 
their proposals for the us constitution, which `secur[ed] for limited times to authors 
. . . the exclusive right to their respective writings' (article 1, section 8, clause 8, us 
constitution). in reality, though, this protection only extended to the completed, 
original, printed version of the text (including covers, illustrations and the like) - 
the materiality of the book - and seldom extended to the contents or ideas, which 
might be reprinted without consent as long as it did not take on exactly the same 
form as the original. enforcing these restrictions was, of course, extremely difficult 
in a national context that displayed strong resistance to a centralised federal gov ernment, frequently empowered local, regional and state legislatures to rule on 
copyright infringements, and in which `leaks' of proofs or even printers' plates were 
the norm.

this `culture of reprinting' (mcgill, 2003) was driven by extremely high lit eracy rates in the antebellum us, which far exceeded britain for most of the century, as well as the lack of a regulated book trade that would only come about 
with the rise of new york as the main us publishing powerhouse following the 

10
civil war. 1 what dickens (and many subsequent critics) failed to grasp about 
american literary culture was the fact that piracy had never meant quite what it 
had signified in the motherland. whereas in imperial centres like london piracy 
meant loss of trade, in the colonies (including ireland, scotland and wales) it 
meant access to resources deemed to be the right of subjects of the crown, yet 
frequently prohibited by policies of protectionism and tariffs that enriched the 
municipalities at the expense of the provinces. the greater concern, though, lay 
in how copyright uncomfortably wedded the growing publishing industry to governmental systems of regulation in such a way that, if misused, might result in a 
monopoly that was ultimately hazardous to trade. even british politicians by the 
time of dickens's trip to the us were concerned with the potential dangers of 
authorial copyright in perpetuity. in a parliamentary speech on the publishing 
industry the noted historian and mp thomas babbington macaulay stated the 
following:

copyright is monopoly. . . the effect of monopoly generally is to make 
articles scarce, to make them dear, and to make them bad. it is good that 
authors should be remunerated; and the least exceptionable way of remunerating them is by a monopoly. yet monopoly is an evil. (macaulay  in 
ringer, 1974: 13)

until recently, critical consensus rested upon a presumption that international copyright was a universal good: beneficial for artists, the professionalisation of writing, 
and for the development of a national literary culture. yet such critical assumptions 
have rested upon a certain conception of nations that has emphasised a coherent 
sense of borders and national autonomy, rather than how national culture is cul tivated out of exchange and conflict with others. additionally, critics have tended 

  1  as n. n. feltes has noted, the growth of the usa as a publishing powerhouse occurred especially 

after the chace act of 1891, which empowered the american publishing industry by granting inter national copyright to certain nations (britain included) on the proviso that the work was first or 
simultaneously published in the united states (1994: 271-280).

 11 
to regard the professionalisation of writing in the nineteenth century (a practice 
dickens is central to the story of) as important for the development of forms of literary culture focused around the autonomy of texts, close reading, and a `romantic' 
conception of individual authorship. however, this actually presents a more coher ent picture of literary culture in the early nineteenth century than is strictly accurate. 
abandoning a critical negativity towards piracy allows one to develop a radical counterhistory to modern, professionalised capitalism in the book market. adrian johns 
has argued that it was the patriots' strategy of piracy towards britain that had helped 
motivate much of the rhetoric of the american revolution. the pirating of texts had 
created the conditions for the dissemination of revolutionary ideas in the colonies, 
where geographically disparate populations and the absence of a controlling centre 
of power would otherwise have rendered such collective action impossible. johns 
writes:

in britain and ireland, piracy was controversial. in the american colonies, it 
was revolutionary. . .. by the time the war of independence broke out, some 
were ready to make piracy a tool of insurrection. for them the very act of 
reprinting london's books was an act of defiance. incitement to join the 
revolutionary cause, word of the rising itself, and news of its fortunes all 
circulated across the colonies by their labors. (johns, 2009: 179)

even as late as the 1840s, the public sphere in the us was still governed by the 
same logic of abundance, diversity of opinion, and reprinting that was a product of 
the piratical origins of the american revolution, producing a literary culture that 
was to observers distinctly carnivalesque. as johns notes, `by the 1820s, jacksonian 
america had a secure and vibrant public sphere--but to european eyes an utterly 
piratical one' (2009: 180). when encountering a british representative such as dick ens, the history of piracy and free use of intellectual property became more than just 
a matter of international copyright but, instead, a clearly anti-imperialist gesture of 
defiance against an old enemy. despite the efforts of many writers (whitman, poe, 
melville, lippard and hawthorne included) to lobby for increased regulation of the 

12
book trade for the purpose of cultivating a less precarious national literary culture, 
there remained a strong and influential public desire to maintain the piratical status 
quo, though this did not come from writers so much as from printers who generated 
large incomes from reprinting. 2 this restriction of authors' rights in favour of free 
trade was further heightened by the apparent latency of the romantic movement 
in america, which had only recently begun to gain significant ground by the time of 
dickens's visit.3 whereas in britain the combination of the individual rights of the 
author and the question of individual copyright had long been established through 
the conflation of art with personal `genius' put forward by romantic luminaries such 
as wordsworth, the us's stubborn commitment to enlightenment principles of circulation and concepts of the `public good' carried on well into the nineteenth century. 
this meant that developing a culture around the idea of copyright first demanded 
the cultivation of support for the idea that literature was the product of an individual 
consciousness that was inviolate and absolute. however, the issues were far more 
complex than being merely a matter of english support for international copyright 
and american distrust of it. instead, they responded to the complex relationships of 
class and coterie in american publishing at the time. in the early- to mid-nineteenth 
century romanticism was far less established in the usa than much scholarship 
has suggested and still constituted a largely elite discourse mainly supported by the 
upper echelons of the american literati - groups like the boston transcendentalists 
whom dickens admired greatly. the problem was that the romantic movement's 

  2  importantly, most of the writers associated with lobbying for increased regulation named above did 

so as part of american publishing groups (hawthorne with ticknor and fields, melville with duy ckinck's set, lippard through links to labour unions and the peterson and brothers group in phila delphia, whitman through his performed relationship to the boston transcendentalists). as mcgill 
(2003) has shown, poe was picked up by the young america group but was a reluctant joiner.
  3  there are, of course, exceptions to this such as william cullen bryant or washington irving's `roman tic' work of the 1820s and 1830s, or the paintings of the hudson river school. dickens's 1842 visit 
predated the founding of the `young america movement' in 1845 and evert duyckinck taking up editorial duties at the democratic review in 1844: both major moments for the american wing of romanticism. additionally, the transcendentalist movement, whose main national organ  the dial had only 
begun publishing in 1840, was yet to achieve a very strong national presence and still remained 
largely confined to boston. in  american notes dickens spoke favourably of transcendentalism, wil liam channing, and of the culture of boston more generally.

 13 
celebration of individual rights was easily sutured to a romantic nationalism, as the 
genius of the author became an index of the genius of a people. this discourse was 
central to the logic of elite publishing groups like evert duyckinck's young america 
movement who, in the years following dickens's visit, argued in favour of interna tional copyright not only for reasons of ensuring fair pay to american authors, but 
also to embolden their claims to the local, identifiable provenance of writing - its 
relation to the individual and land that produced it. for authors like poe who, as 
mcgill and leon jackson have shown, were vocal critics of seeing nationalism as a 
basis for literary merit, copyright was a complex proposition. whilst poe supported 
the rights of authors on financial grounds, the association of copyright with romantic 
nationalism - as seen in dickens's wish to extend a british law into us territory and 
young america's wish to turn copyright into the basis of celebrating `americanness' -  
was beyond the pale. it is an established critical insight that poe made use of unau thorised reprinting as a basis for his career and his aesthetic, situating most of his 
tales in scarcely identifiable locations abroad that reflected the mobility of literature 
in the antebellum period, as well as utilising a variety of authorial frames to disas sociate the work from its provenance in one author (mcgill, 2003; jackson, 2008). 

`the idiosyncrasy of his intellect': edgar allan poe, charles dickens and authorship
`the masque of the red death' can usefully be seen as a gothic burlesque about the 
complexities of transnational authorship that resonates with the antebellum con cerns around copyright that dickens's tour brought to a head in the popular press. 
the tale engages these questions of authorship and control by means of a carefully 
considered dramatisation of various forms of ownership. in the tale poe attempts 
to locate a middle ground for expression that draws on the energies of the popular 
print expose's in its critique of excessive authorial control, whilst also demonstrat ing the appeal of such dominance when faced with the debased, omniscient and 
omnivorous power of popular press reprinting. consequently, the form of the tale 
is worth considering in some detail. as a short story, poe's work is invested in nego tiating the middle ground between literary respectability of the kind dickens was 

14
afforded (based on his claims to be an individual, inviolate, romantic intellect), and 
the less reputable mass-market sensationalism of the popular dailies. robert tally, jr. 
has suggested that poe's experience of writing for the new magazines helped fuel his 
wish for international copyright. referring to poe's article `some secrets of the magazine prison-house' tally remarks that `poe had become increasingly agitated about 
the lack of international copyright protections, which not only cut into the poten tial profits of popular american authors but allowed the literary marketplace in the 
united states to be flooded with english. . . literature' (2014: 96). yet, the argument 
is not so simple as to suggest that poe was also wholly and completely unequivocal 
about the necessity of hard copyright restrictions, since his concern for the impor tance of literature was also partly about circulation. consequently, poe's suggestion 
in `some secrets of the magazine prison-house' that there still remained an `esprit de 
patrie. . . [suggesting] that there is somewhere still existing an ember not altogether 
quenched among the fires of good feeling for letters and literary men, that once 
animated the american bosom' (poe, 1984: 1036; italics in original) served both as a 
call for greater support for writers in the form of financial remuneration and an evocation of the enlightenment logic of circulation and the `public good' of literature. 
reading poe's 1845 essay in this way helps explain some of the artful ambivalences 
of `the masque of the red death', which neither throws its weight wholly behind the 
dominion of the author, nor calls for unlimited, boundless, ungoverned circulation. 
as i have written elsewhere, this liminal position between respectability and massmarket popularity was a crucial shaping force for the short story genre as it devel oped in american magazines. 4 in a moment in which the rights of authors were so 
questioned in us public discourse, fully-fledged romantic conceptions of genius and 
originality were hardly suitable for the magazines and, by extension, the short story 
form as it appeared in them, which relied, at least in part, upon an extensive public 
circulation to justify their value to the publishers.

dickens's treatment by the us press at the time of the publication of `masque 
of the red death' serves as a cautionary tale about the applicability in the american 

  4  see collins (2013).

 15 
scene of broadly `romantic', british conceptions of authorship and copyright that 
characterised fiction as the exclusive product and property of a single identifiable 
author in perpetuity. indeed, dickens's wish to control copyright extended beyond 
mere proprietorship over one edition of the text and into all formats in which his 
characters appeared was a huge overreach that reeked of a domineering british chauvinism. as juliet john remarks: `his elastic concept of the literary text is evident in 
the use he made of a range of different formats for his writings. . . serialization, the 
short story, the novel available in various editions and at differing prices, the public 
readings, the drama, the illustrated text. . .' (2010 : 49). in other words, dickens's 
sense of control over his own productions crossed a dividing line between the first 
edition that had been protected by us laws and the intellectual property of ideas 
(a new area for copyright law in the us). indeed, to place restrictions on all use of 
dickens's characters would have suppressed a large sector of the book trade, not to 
mention the us theatre or performances of  tableaux vivants, which frequently drew 
on dickensian source material. to explore this idea poe draws attention to how the 
physical spaces of the story are direct expressions and outpourings of prospero's 
intellect and `eccentric and august taste' (poe, 1982: 269), which manifest as a certain 
wild, multiform publishing empire comprising `buffoons. . . improvisatori. . . ballet 
dancers [and] musicians' (poe, 1982: 269). importantly, as i have already suggested, 
the legislation for the 1842 copyright act in britain extended protections to `rights 
to representation', rolling together the author's performative and textual worlds in 
a way that had seldom been effectively policed by british law before the middle decades of the nineteenth century. 

in naming his fictional duke after shakespeare's magician in the tempest, poe drew 
parallels between the exercise of authorial autonomy over `rights to  representation' 
implicit in the desire of poe's prospero to express his unique aesthetic sensibili ties in all forms of art and culture, and the ambition of shakespeare's prospero to 
control the elements and colonial power relations. indeed, the word `dominion' -   
implying both the legal relation of the colonies to the imperial centre and rights of 
access and control - is the concluding concept of `the masque of the red death': 
`illimitable dominion over all' (poe, 1982: 273). as i have suggested, the transatlantic 

16
legal framework for international copyright was perceived by many of its critics as 
imperialist in nature. this postcolonial history i have outlined above, then, provides 
an important social framework for understanding the conception of power in poe's 
tale. indeed, the word `dominion' is ambiguous and evokes the twinned frameworks 
of the legal language of imperialism and the idea of authorship in the way that other 
synonyms may not have done: `control' or `mastery' are far too specific in their evocation of power, while `sovereignty' is far too unambiguous.5 

in the tale, the author then proceeds to claim that for prospero the `external 
world could take care of itself' (poe, 1982: 269), suggesting that the prince displays 
a wilful ignorance towards the realities of life beyond the walls of his own creation. 
poe shows that whereas variety and `all the appliances of pleasure' (poe, 1982: 269) 
define the world inside the abbey they are actually very carefully policed by a form of 
panoptic surveillance: `to the right and left, in the middle of each wall, a tall and narrow gothic window looked out upon a closed corridor which pursued the windings 
of the suite' (poe, 1982: 270). this `closed corridor' is a significant and subtle detail 
in poe's story. mentioned only once, it implies that the masque itself is not a space 
for the free discourse of bodies and desires, but a constantly observed space of statelicensed liberty. if we accept that prospero is a stand-in for the romantic artist then 
it is important to note that his regime of jollity is a highly policed entity, controlled 
not by `the gates of iron' alone but by a regime of vision. such a legal regime of 
surveillance was required for the enforcement of literary copyright, with an official 
version of a book having to be registered with an institution of federal power, such 
as the library of congress or the british museum, in order to qualify for legal protections. subsequent editions were then subjected to surveillance - carefully observed 

  5  poe's love of wordplay is well known and extends into the interesting choice of the word `illimitable', 

rather than `unlimited', `limitless', `boundless' or `unbounded' - all of which appear in webster's 1828 
dictionary and were in common parlance. whilst it is impossible to fully trace the provenance without 
the working drafts of poe's story it is worth mentioning that dickens himself was regularly called `the 
inimitable dickens' in the us (even in an `original letter from charles dickens' article that appeared 
in the same january to june bumper issue of  graham's as `the masque of the red death'). the pho netic similarities between `inimitable' and `illimitable' are perhaps worth noting. 

 17 
by publishers and the government. it is precisely for this reason that figures such as 
thomas macaulay (quoted above) saw the extension of copyright as a pathway to 
dangerous monopoly: a capitalist collusion with the state that extended the power of 
both and troubled enlightenment ideals that trumpeted the value to the individual 
of access to literature and ideas. 

in contrast to the policed regime inside the castle, the world beyond is charac terised by the rapid diffusion of a pestilence that leads towards a kind of gothic universality; a nightmarish version of collective, public ownership not dissimilar from 
dickens's own image of the press as a homogenising force. the narrator describes 
the symptoms of the disease as being identical in all patients: `sharp pains. . . sudden 
dizziness. . . profuse bleeding at the pores' that lead eventually to a wholesale loss of 
identity as `scarlet stains' finally render the victim unrecognisable and so beyond the 
`sympathy of his fellow-men' (poe, 1982: 269). the rapidity of the `seizure, progress, 
and termination of the disease' (poe, 1982: 269) may be read as poe's comment upon 
the operations of the antebellum culture of reprinting, where, as dickens discovered 
to his chagrin, an `original' could spread widely and without the hindrance of borders 
at a quite considerable speed. 

the associations between poe and dickens are more than anecdotal. by 1842 
poe had already written several major reviews of dickens's work and they had met in 
the march of that year when dickens was in philadelphia. the reviews were generally 
measured and actually revealed poe's deepening suspicion of the english author's 
stylistic direction. in a february 1842 review of barnaby rudge in graham's poe had 
upbraided dickens for the very thing he attributes to prince prospero; an excess of 
style. he speaks about the `mad design' and `untimely desire for a novel path' (poe, 
1984: 244) that ruin the text. the description in full reads: 

we think that the whole book has been an effort for him - solely through 
the nature of its design. he has been smitten with an untimely desire for a 
novel path. the idiosyncrasy of his intellect would lead him, naturally, into 
the most fluent and simple style of narration. . . he has a talent for all things, 

18
but no positive genius for adaptation, and still less for that metaphysical art 
in which the souls of all mysteries lie. (poe, 1984: 244) 

poe's umbrage in the review is directed towards the architecture of dickens's 
novel, its lack of naturalness, and its want of compositional simplicity. when 
read in the context of dickens's visit to the us, and alongside the barnaby rudge 
review a few months earlier, poe's references to the architecture of the castle in 
`the masque of the red death' take on a more specific meaning related to his 
concern that literary art be formally restrained. the strange layout of the abbey 
is a product of `the duke's love of the  bizarre' that leads to the structure being 
`irregularly disposed. . . a sharp turn at every twenty or thirty yards, and at each 
turn a novel effect' (poe, 1982: 269; italics in original). additionally, poe chose to 
place the story in the same issue as his review of hawthorne in which he claims 
that the american author is `original at all points' (poe, 1984: 574), not least 
because hawthorne remains free from eccentricity. the battle staged in poe's 
`the masque of the red death' is therefore transatlantic in nature - pitting american simplicity against a distinctly european-inflected form of excess. yet it is also 
about the battle of different forms of intellect and their relationship to control. if 
prince prospero stands in for a generic european author, then, for poe the unfettered expression of their intellect is a moral problem; characterised as it is by a 
bizarrely egocentric cruelty that leads to an imperialistic ambition to force the 
products of his own mind upon his people. by contrast, hawthorne's intellect is 
rendered as measured and appropriately american - influencing his readers less 
by strangeness of design, than by potency of `tone' and, famously, his capacity to 
`conceive a certain  single effect' (poe, 1984: 586; italics in original). for poe, it is 
not even the specifics of the location and content that impress him about haw thorne, as such valorisation of geographical locality would resemble support for 
the literary nationalism he broadly rejected (the kind of nationalistic lionisation 
herman melville would parody in his 1850 essay `hawthorne and his mosses'), so 
much as an personalised form of feeling produced by structural effects.

 19 

poe's tale refers outside itself to mimic the style of particular forms of writing in 
the popular press that had reached their apotheosis during dickens's tour. to illus trate my claim that poe draws as much on popular literary form as on more elite 
forms of discourse, i will turn to a passage in the story in which the narrator describes 
the interior of the castle. he writes:

it was a voluptuous scene, that masquerade. but first let me tell of the rooms 
in which it was held. there were seven - an imperial suite. in many palaces, 
however, such suites form a long and straight vista, while the folding doors 
slide back nearly to the walls on either hand, so that the view of the whole 
extent is scarcely impeded. . . there was a sharp turn at every twenty or thirty 
yards, and at each turn a novel effect. to the right and the left, in the middle 
of each wall, a tall and narrow gothic window looked out upon a closed corridor. . . (poe, 1982: 269)

the narrator then describes each of the seven apartments with considerable, 
technical precision, commenting upon their colour, shape and furnishings. what 
strikes the reader here is the excess of specificity. the phrases `but first let me 
tell you of the rooms' and `in many palaces, however' (poe, 1982: 269) are clumsy 
and out of keeping with the careful attention to aesthetic formalism that shape 
the rest of the tale. the effect is to draw the reader from within the world of the 
narrative into a new order of representation, one that includes a sense of context, 
history and precedent (`in many palaces, however, such suites do. . .'), whilst also 
implying a certain panoptic vision on behalf of the narrator. this context, the 
story establishes, is the very thing that prince prospero forcibly excludes from the 
masque. in his effort to `bid defiance to contagion' (poe, 1982: 269), the prince 
also bids defiance to history. the author's peculiar tone here interrupts the flow 
and `hermetic' logic that new critics such as vanderbilt have drawn out in their 
readings of the tale by striking a strangely condescending note of commanding 
oversight and expertise, rather like a tour guide or historian. 

20
the significance of poe's excessive description in `the masque of the red death' 
only becomes clear when it is compared to a common genre within the workingclass penny press of the 1840s that carl ostrowski has called the `popular expose''; a 
jacksonian version of muckraking or investigative journalism. the expose', ostrowski 
argues, was `a generic classification that straddle[d] traditional lines between fiction 
and non-fiction', and `constituted itself in the author's claim to bringing shocking 
[or] hidden truths to light' (2009: 1, 2). expose' writers would often speculate and 
bend various truths in order to reveal other, more pressing, realities (such as increasing divides between rich and poor or sensational abuses of power). by 1842, such 
expose's had become an important tool in the popular, lower-class press's arsenal 
against elite control and influence. in addition to revealing a jacksonian distrust of 
privatised elite power, such expose's often deployed an exceedingly lofty and exalted 
tone to affect an imitative mockery and critique of the very elites whom they pil loried. expose's of dickens were numerous, but i wish here to quote from two that 
resemble the tone of poe's short story: the new york aurora's `extra' of 15th february 
1842 (whose   harshly satirical take on dickens's visit to new york was most likely 
penned by a young walt whitman, who had recently been appointed as editor and 
features writer) and an anonymous review of dickens's new york trip that appeared 
as a supplement in the 15 th february issue of the  new york herald . a comparison 
of the text of the  aurora's extra with `the masque of the red death' reveals some 
surprising similarities.

the author of the aurora piece writes:

we have seen the rooms at the carlton, prepared for dickens. there is a 
reception room upon the second parlor, on the corner of broadway and 
leonard street, where he can sit in the morning, and overlook the fashionables in their daily promenade, and many, many a bright eye will look up at 
that window. . . the curtains are white and crimson - the carpets wilton - 
the furniture plain and elegant, and the pictures superb. there is a beautiful 
one over the mantel - a fine painting, which dickens will take a sever [sic] 
look at, and will surely admire. . . the private parlor, his sanctum sanctorum, 

 21 

where only his most intimate friends will be admitted, is room no. 37, on the 
third floor. on one side of him is the celebrated genesse heiress, miss w--, 
on the other, a son of the immortal clinton. (anon., 1908: 24)6 

like in `the masque of the red death' the author then speaks of each of the various 
chambers; one that is `perfect bijou', a parlor in which hangs `an original vandyke', 
the `most exquisite' (anon., 1908: 24) bedroom. in his journalistic expose', whitman 
performs a complex balancing act. at once revelling in a certain vicarious prestige 
afforded him by means of his access to the inner `sanctum sanctorum' of the illustrious british writer and his small friendship group, the piece also serves as a peculiar 
kind of threat; offering details that might easily be abused by fans, other journalists 
and even criminals (the number of his room, the location of a `celebrated genesse 
heiress' [anon., 1908: 24] and controversial american political figures). there is also 
at play here a tone of rich irony. immediately preceding this passage is another in 
which the author apostrophises dickens: `the editor of  the aurora welcomes thee 
in his own behalf; for in weariness, in solitude, in sickness, in prison, thy genius has 
enlivened the gloomy hours, and cheered the desponding. so to thee and thine, 
welcome!' (anon., 1908, 24). here, dickens is evoked as the father of a form of 
ethical fiction that `enlivened the gloomy hours' of the neglected and oppressed in 
victorian society. in this context, the subsequent description of the `superb' carlton 
house on broadway, written in a high tone appears sarcastic, even, to use a term 
from modern journalism, snarky. underneath the overt praise of dickens's ethics the 
reader can detect an anger that stems perhaps from the well-known fact of dickens's 
hatred for the penny press and his attempts to restrict the well-established practice 
of reprinting through international copyright control. aimed at the lower-middleclass mechanics who were the readers of  the aurora, the writer's knowledge of the 
interior of dickens's temporary domicile serves to illustrate a mastery that he does 
not actually possess, yet he performs as his right, playing an artful game with the 

  6  the original text has also been digitised and is available courtesy of the walt whitman archive at 

(http://www.whitmanarchive.org/published/periodical/aurora.html). attribution to whitman is 
assumed based on this archival work.

22
concept of private and public ownership that speaks to the us copyright battle in 
which dickens was involved. whitman is engaged in a form of class mimicry, or, 
more precisely emulation. as andrew lawson has remarked: `emulation evolves from 
the desire to imitate another person with the aim of equaling or excelling him or 
her. . . imitation with a competitive edge' (2004: 598). the piece displays a certain 
self-confident virtuosity perfectly in keeping with the politics of the paper and of an 
author who, in the 1855 version of `song of myself', would perform similarly aggressive acts of intrusion and violation. 7 returning to poe, we can see how the heavily 
descriptive qualities of `the masque of the red death' might operate less as a litmus 
test of the real-world application of his own aesthetic theories, as vanderbilt sug gests, than as a form of satire that neatly punctures the private life and activities of 
a generic european aristocrat, sharing similarities with one of the primary literary 
techniques of the penny press.

americans often used dickens's characters in unlicensed, non-traditional set tings that were often oddly at variance with the author's own particular textual 
usages; challenging the idea that dickens's books were the sole source through 
which us audiences might experience the words of the english writer. as i have 
already mentioned, the copyright act of 1842 that was being debated in the 
british parliament at the time extended protections over literary materials to their 
theatrical expressions - a clause that would have stifled a significant and lucrative 
resource for the american theatre, had it been introduced in the us. dickens's 
arrival in new york on 14th february had been the occasion of an elaborate ball for 
3,000 elite paying guests at the park theatre. significantly, the body that made 
up the planning committee for the event included some of the most vocal sup porters of international copyright and of literary nationalism, philip hone, henry 

  7  whitman's poetic voice in `song of myself' shuttles between intimacy and violation. some examples 

include the persona's claim that it wishes to `[u]nscrew the locks from the doors! / unscrew the doors 
themselves from their jambs!' (whitman, 1855: 32), whilst also suggesting a few pages later that   
`i turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself / and tighten her all night to my 
thighs and lips' (1855: 41). overall, this produces the effect of the poet as a slightly overly familiar 
friend or acquaintance. this mixture of threat and companionship is repeated throughout the poem 
and is distinctly reminiscent of the tone of the aurora persona.

 23 
brevoort, evert duyckinck and washington irving, testifying to the relationship 
between elite coteries and authors' rights in the antebellum us. the commit tee charged with honouring the writer in the city reported the following in their 
minutes:

to heighten the effect, and in compliance with the desire universally 
expressed, it is recommended that the ball room represent various com partments of [the] `curiosity shop' in which the productions of boz may be 
illustrated. in order to add a strikingly novel and agreeable feature to the 
intended fete, it is suggested that a number of tableaux vivants be formed 
by competent artists, in the intervals of the dance, drawn from the novels, 
sketches, poems and dramas of mr. dickens, and shadowing forth, in living 
pictures, the graphic and glowing delineations of this singularly gifted and 
original author. (anon., 1842a: 4)

`the boz ball' resembles poe's fictional `masque' in the manner by which the products of dickens's imagination, egotistical outgrowths of `the prince's own eccen tric and august taste' (poe, 1982: 269), became physically and performatively manifested in reality. like prospero's masquerade, it was solely for the most powerful 
political and publishing elites of the city. for the boz ball committee, their event 
was a key moment in which the widely circulating productions of dickens could 
be returned to their source - in the sense that these tableaux vivants could be 
performed in the presence of their creator - effectively dramatising the anchoring 
logic of copyright. again, it is useful to return to the aurora extra which included 
a long description for readers of the boz ball. the aurora writes: 

the tableaux vivants were very fine indeed, and to those that could see them, 
afforded great gratification. the scene was a curious one. there was a raised 
stage at the back of the ballroom, and at the sound of a gong, the curtain 
drew up, and for the space of a minute, the characters were visible to those 
that were near enough, and tall enough, to see them. (anon., 1908: 46)

24
the forms of power present in the authorial function of copyright law are also 
dramatised in a memorable, expressive moment of poe's story:

[t]here strikes the ebony clock which stands in the hall of velvet. and then, 
for a moment, all is still, and all is silent save the voice of the clock. the 
dreams are stiff-frozen as they stand. but the echoes of the chime die away - 
they have endured but an instant - and a light, half-subdued laughter floats 
after them as they depart. (poe, 1982: 271) 

in both pieces the sound of a `chime' or `gong' interrupts the dancing, and forces the 
audience to stand stock-still. in the case of the boz ball, the revellers watch tableaux 
vivants, whereas in poe's story the audience, in effect, become those tableaux. in 
both cases, though, the products of the author's mind (whether prospero or dickens)  
render the audience static. as the new york committee for honouring dickens 
desired, these tableaux produced the effect of reverence, the removal of his fiction 
from a ludic, public realm in which it could be reinterpreted and reconsidered, and 
the forging of that work into the shape of an `official' monumentalisation. as such, 
the tableaux were synecdochal of the deployment of elite power that characterised 
the committee's treatment of dickens more generally and was, so republican dissenters argued, eroding the free play of ideas that had helped cultivate the revolution. as 
a dramatic device in poe's story, tableaux serve a similar purpose: one of reverence 
and stasis, a ritual action of deference. yet it is not enough to point out that the 
ritual seems to replay monarchical or old world cultures of prestige and honour; 
the mechanical nature of the tolling bell also recalls the rationalisation of time that 
allowed for the industrialisation of labour. consequently, prospero appears to read ers as both an elite artist and an industrial overseer - a dual-threat to the security and 
ideology of the jacksonian artisan republic.

another expose' of the boz ball in the new york herald also resembles poe's interior description in `masque of the red death'. in the 15 th february edition of the 
herald, the author describes the decoration of the park theatre in minute detail, 
breaking the theatre down into seven distinct areas of unique design: `first tier. . .   

 25 
second tier front. . . third tier front. . . fourth tier. . . boxes second tier. . . the 
proscenium. . . and the dome' (anon., 1842b: 3). the author then describes the stage 
decorations and arrangements, which `were the most chaste and beautiful that can 
be imagined'. the author goes on to say: 

the whole stage represented a splendid chamber, of carved and gilded oak, 
with magnificent ceiling to match, of the elizabethan age, with deep bow 
windows on each side. . .. on each panel of this room was placed a medallion 
tableau, highly finished, representing a scene from boz's works. there were 
twenty-two in number. . . (anon., 1842b: 3)

even among expose's for the popular press the description of the interior of the park 
theatre by the  herald reporter is excessive here. the paper was known for putting 
out extras concerning the events of the new york uppercrust's party season, yet this 
precision of architectural description, especially when paired with illustrations, is 
remarkable for the sheer quantity of copy given over to it. according to the  herald 
reporter, each of the seven areas was individually colour-coded and themed: the first 
tier was `covered with white muslin', the second tier front curiously decorated with 
twenty-three classical statues and medallions, the third tier front `festoons of flow ers', the fourth tier portraits of american presidents with `english and american 
ensigns crossed', the boxes of the second tier contained `red-striped drapery curtains 
to represent tents, each having a blue ground in the corner' and the proscenium and 
dome were covered with `red, white and blue bunting' (anon., 1842b: 3). overall, the 
effect communicated by the reporter is of a sensory overload of conflicting, decon textualised symbols. comparison with poe's own description is fruitful:

[the] windows were of stained glass whose color varied in accordance with 
the prevailing hue of the decorations of the chamber into which it opened. 
that at the eastern extremity was hung, for example, in blue - and vividly 
blue were its windows. the second chamber was purple in its ornaments and 
tapestries, and here the panes were purple. the third was green throughout, 

26
and so were the casements. the fourth was furnished and lighted with 
orange - the fifth with white - the sixth with violet. the seventh apartment 
was closely shrouded in black velvet tapestries that hung all over the ceiling 
and down the walls, falling in heavy folds upon a carpet of the same material 
and hue. (poe, 1982: 269)

whilst it is impossible to know precisely whether poe read the new york expose's, 
the descriptions directly point to the tone of popular newspaper journalism. poe's 
story also describes seven individually decorated chambers in an enclosed space that 
permits entry only to the elites of the social world. poe continues to describe each of 
the chambers as containing:

[no] lamp or candelabrum, amid the profusion of golden ornaments that lay 
scattered to and fro or depended from the roof. there was no light of any 
kind emanating from lamp or candle within the suite of chambers. but in 
the corridors that followed the suite, there stood, opposite to each window, 
a heavy tripod, bearing a brazier of fire that protected its rays through the 
tinted glass and so glaringly illumined the room. (poe, 1984: 270)

like poe, the author of the  herald article dedicates a whole sub-section to lighting, 
noting in particular `six golden astral lamps hanging from golden brackets'. indeed, 
there is a notable excess of lighting and gold for the venue, with `splendid golden 
chandeliers', pillars supporting `golden candelabras' and more, in addition to the 
usual gaslights for the theatre (anon., 1842b: 3). the references to gold in both poe 
and the herald may, of course, point in both cases to a sense of clear and contrived 
ostentation. the style of simultaneous wonder and satirical excess in the herald article represents the american popular press's approach to the elite's dream of dominion over law and space. when captured by poe's story, this complex affect reflects his 
own comments on the excessiveness of dickens's style i remarked upon above. additionally, it shows how the author was exploited and lionised by elites who sought 
to utilise his talent to advance their own careers and perform their own sense of   

 27 
entitlement - a capitalist cabal. in the context of ongoing debates about how copy right legislation could negatively affect producers of literary material (especially the 
artisans and mechanics who were the traditional readers of the  herald) and enrich 
elites off the back of an author's work, poe's use of popular print techniques in `the 
masque of the red death' demonstrates his precarious position. as a supporter of 
international copyright to advance author's rights and a person concerned about the 
implications of such a move in assisting the rise of a nationalistic modern culture 
industry, poe had to find a way to balance these competing needs. consequently, 
`masque of the red death' is both lower-class satire and elite romanticism simultaneously - a generically unstable performance of excess that deliberately undercuts itself.

as i have attempted to demonstrate, poe's tale utilised the language of popular 
print culture to weave its rich tapestry of gothic excess and `gaudy appearances'. 
the work was part of a wider debate in antebellum society about how in a trans atlantic world the changing role of the author was seemingly gravitating towards 
the emergence of a nationalistic literary-industrial complex. for many americans 
in 1842, dickens was more than a talented and popular writer or celebrity; he was a 
tool by which to expose important local and national regimes of class stratification 
and inequality. dickens may have ultimately regretted his trip to the us, but for an 
important sector of the american workforce it was a rare opportunity to voice their 
dissent from emerging practices of monopolisation and capitalist control that were 
wresting power away from the american people and into the hands of cosmopolitan 
publishing elites. poe's tale may be read as a dramatisation of these similar concerns, 
which were shaping the position of the author and the role of literature in the transatlantic literary marketplace at the time of its first publication in graham's. 

\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma  \delta \upsilon  \phi \theta \sigma \psi \omega \psi ff\sigma  fi\sigma fl\sigma \psi ffi\psi \theta \sigma 

`since the acceptance for publication of this article, the researcher has become a 
trustee of the open library of humanities'.

\gamma \delta ffiffl\psi \sigma \xi \theta i \phi \theta \sigma \psi \omega \psi ff\sigma ff

the author declares that they have no competing interests.

28
references
anon 1842a welcome to charles dickens, the boz ball, to be given under the 

direction of committee of citizens of new york at the park theatre on the 
fourteenth of february next. new york: j c house, printer, 88 barclay street.
anon 1842b the great boz ball last night. the new york herald (15 february).
anon 1908 account of the boz ball given in honor of charles dickens in new york 

city, 15 february 1842. from:  new york aurora - extra.  cedar rapids, iowa: 
privately printed.
baldwin, p  2014  the copyright wars: three centuries of transatlantic battle. 

princeton, nj: princeton university press.
collins, m j  2013 the master-key of our theme: master betty and the politics of 

theatricality in herman melville's `the fiddler'.  journal of american studies , 
47(3): 759-776.
despain, j 2014 nineteenth-century transatlantic reprinting and the embodied book. 

burlington, vt and farnham, surrey: ashgate.
dickens, c 1842  american notes for general circulation, vol. 1 . london: chapman 

and hall.
feltes, n n  1994 international copyright: structuring `the condition of modernity' 

in british publishing. in: woodmansee, m and jaszi, p (eds.)  the construction of 
authorship: textual appropriation in law and literature . durham, nc and lon don: duke university press, pp. 271-281.
jackson, l 2008 the business of letters: authorial economies in antebellum america. 

stanford, ca: stanford university press. 
john, j 2010 dickens and mass culture. oxford: oxford university press.
johns, a  2009  piracy: the intellectual property wars from gutenberg to gates . 

london: university of chicago press.
lawson, a 2004 class mimickry in stephen crane's city.  american literary history, 

16(4): 596-618. 
lehuu,  i 2000  carnival on the page: popular print culture in antebellum america. 

chapel hill, nc: university of north carolina press.

2
1 introduction

the ambiance suddenly changes as you turn right from that wide and busy 
avenue skirted by impressive imperial-style buildings and world-brand 
stores, and you find yourself on a narrow street, having to move along with 
a crowd chattering in a diversity of tongues. on the sides you glimpse kebab 
buffets and souvenir shops, their entrances masked by the heap of cloths 
and bags hanging from the jambs and lintels. turn right again, and you'll be 
facing a steep stairway up the hill, fringed by the same colourful merchan dise and bearded men in long tunics flinging in all their charm to catch your 
attention. chatter flies low above your head, and the smell of fruity smoke 
arising from hookahs hits you in the face. the buildings seem rather small 
and shaky, with narrow and uneven windows, giving the impression that 
they are moving along with you on these winding alleys. you feel lost, but 
soon you run into a wall guiding your way further. suddenly you hear an 
engine, as if coming from another world, one you've left behind somewhere 
in the future. it's a minibus, slowly bumping along on the cobblestones, 
compelling you to cling against the cold surface of a building wall while 
it passes. finally you reach a square packed with tourists and street artists. 
on the left you see an old church, its steeple, crowned with a large cross, 
reaching high into the skies. on the right, the majestic view of the medieval 
fortress lying on a hilltop. you are absorbed into the scenery, everything 
turns silent, distant and motionless until a quaint, unworldly voice disrupts 
your contemplation; it is the adhan, the islamic call to prayer, recited from a 
nearby minaret. you are, indeed, in the albayzi'n, the old moorish neighbourhood of granada (adaptation from field notes, 8 april 2011).

the above description could be a passage from the diary of anyone visiting the neighbourhood for the first time. the albayzi'n has gone through considerable transfor mation since becoming a unesco world heritage site in 1994, allowing for such 
highly romanticised and orientalised depictions as the one exemplified here. the   
passage, however, is  allegorical in the anthropological sense that it encapsulates, 
through a sensory description of urban symbolism, the core politico-ideological   

 3 
tension inherent in the site (see clifford, 1986). it is the aim of this article to unpack 
this `tension', the historical roots of which stretch back to the late-15 th-century 
christian-castilian conquest of the emirate of granada, and which has remained an 
often-remarked-upon feature of the neighbourhood. as garci'a lorca (1898-1936), 
the ill-fated local bard noted a century ago, the streets of albayzi'n unfold `a tragedy 
of contrasts': 

everything reveals a mood of infinite woe, an oriental curse that has befallen 
these streets. . . . all that is tranquil and majestic in the vega and the town, 
is rife with angst and tragedy in this moorish district. arabic evocations are   
everywhere. blackish and mouldy arches, paunchy and flat houses with 
ornate galleries, mysterious hovels with oriental outlines . . .  then a 
 vagueness in every gaze that seems to dream of things past . . . and an over whelming fatigue. (garci'a lorca, 1994: 147. translated by the author)

the tensions, contrasts or conflicts of the present, however, are closely related to the 
transformation of the  human architecture--conceived as both architecture built  by 
people, and  the population itself--that has taken place in the neighbourhood over 
the past twenty years. the contemporary experience is somewhat a return to the 
early-twentieth century diversity, following decades of steady de-population and 
urban decay (cabrera medina, 2009). however, the popular characters of the lorcan 
`tragedy'--the pious nun, the foul-mouthed goatherd, the big-eyed prostitutes and 
the gitano musicians (garci'a lorca, 1994: 147)--as well as the characteristic person age of the 1980s, the elderly peasant, the sole surviving vestige of the town's rural 
past, have mostly been replaced by the alternative youth, the new-age artist, the foreign exchange student, the north-african migrant, and the muslim convert among 
others (abend, 2008; bahrami, 1998; duque calvache, 2010; flesler, 2008; rogozensoltar, 2012b; roso'n lorente, 2008).

the various factions and frictions caused by the new diversity have received 
considerable scholarly attention in recent years, as did those relating to local pro jects of urban renovation (for the latter, see, for example, barrios rozu'a,   2002; 
cabrera medina, 2009; castello' nica's, 2003; hita alonso,  1996). the human and 

4
urban aspects of change are intertwined through the process of  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \lambda \pi \psi \theta , a 
vernacular of which has been identified and described in depth by local research ers (duque calvache, 2010; duque calvache, susino and de pablos,   2013; roso'n 
lorente, 2010). while the process was classically discussed in terms of class conflict 
over urban space1--and this is certainly a significant aspect of its manifestation in 
the albayzi'n--the granadan neighbourhood confers upon gentrification an addi tional level of ideological struggle over the ownership of historical  heritage and 
historical memory, one revolving around ethno-religious dichotomies in which dis courses of christian continuity are set against what many perceive as a `return of 
islam' (roso'n lorente and dietz, 2011). this central antagonism is evident in the 
very denomination of the district, having two different popular spellings:  albayzi'n 
and albaici'n. according to duque calvache (2010: 115) the former is used if wishing 
to emphasise the older days of the neighbourhood, its moorish past and exoticism 
(e.g. in unesco documents), while the latter alludes to a more recent past of a 
bucolic catholic working-class community (e.g. in local official documents). i have 
opted for the first spelling not in order to reinforce a romanticised vision instead of 
a more realistic one, but as a constant reminder of the existence of such imagery in 
relation to local cultural `heritage'.

this article examines this ideological struggle by articulating a concept of herit\phi \gamma \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \lambda \pi \psi \theta  which takes its cue from a `critical' understanding of heritage (see winter, 
2013), and describes the localised material and symbolic manifestations of this 
universal ideological principle. the concept thus allows us to see certain processes 
of gentrification as shaped by the universalising ideology of heritage, mediated by 
institutions through which unequal power relations at the local level are created 
and upheld, and having a direct impact on the constitution of the local population. 
as such, the proposed concept goes beyond that of `heritagisation', which has been 
applied--and seems grammatically better fitted--to merely highlight the constructed 
nature of `heritage' (see daugstad and kirchengast, 2013; walsh, 1992).

  1  one famous textbook definition of \omega fffiflffifflij`flffl'fi describes it as `the transformation of a working-class 

or vacant area of the central city into middle-class residential and/or commercial use' (lee, slater and 
wyly, 2008: xv).

 5 

in our case--as in many other contexts (see, for example, evans, 2002; herzfeld, 
2009; rubino, 2005; shaw, 2005, for examples from canada, italy, brazil and 
australia)--the main ideology and surveillance over  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi \xi \lambda \psi \omega  is provided by 
unesco through a specific `heritage discourse' (smith, 2006). locally, the institu tional structures channelling the universal ideological principles into urban prac tice are supported by the municipal and regional governments, as well as by private 
enterprise, religious institutions, and the civil sphere, and this article pays special 
attention to this institutional power-structure with the aim of harnessing its explanatory potential.

the starting contention in any discussion of  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi \xi \lambda \psi \omega  must be that   
`heritage'--as an ideology and an institution--directly and indirectly affects   
processes of urban change by way of intervention in the value system of the global 
market and in local socio-political power relations. reaching such a contention 
requires a contextualisation of `heritage' as a concept, and its description as a   
phenomenon. the concept of heritage is itself one riddled with contradictions, and in  
the following section i will outline some of its foundational dichotomies, between 
its material and immaterial aspects, essential and constructed features, and its   
universalism versus particularity. the later sections of the article will turn to a 
description of the  phenomenal manifestation of heritagification in the albayzi'n, 
building on findings from a fieldwork carried out in april 2011, with the aim to 
provide an assessment of the ideological struggles reflected in the urban conflicts 
taking place in the world heritage neighbourhood.2

  2  the analysed data have been obtained through a combination of sources and methods: observation 

and personal field notes; archival material of local newspaper articles; notes from informal discussions 
with residents, local entrepreneurs and tourists; personal minutes of weekly meetings of the lower 
albayzi'n residents' association; photo-documentation; as well as ten formal interviews with repre sentatives of residents' associations, religious leaders and urban planning professionals. although the 
formal interviews and personal minutes were collected over a short period of one month during april 
2011 due to funding constraints, the informal discussions, and most of the field notes and archival 
material were gathered or identified during a previous exchange semester in the department of social 
anthropology at the university of granada in 2008-2009.

6
2 heritage and memory: a critical connection
following an initial rejection and a decade of planning and commitment to reha bilitation, the albayzi'n was finally granted world heritage status on 17 december 
1994, being included in the extension of the unesco designation which had been 
afforded to the moorish fortress of the alhambra and the gardens of generalife in 
1984. the decision had been long in the waiting, and was not the least surprising; 
as the body of experts recommending the extension made clear, the albayzi'n `has a 
universal value which is complementary to and chronologically earlier than the site 
already on the list' (icomos, 1994: 63), alluding to the remainders of an 11th cen tury zirid wall. this assessment epitomises the main ideological principles underpinning the contemporary institutional conception of `heritage', a critique of which is a 
necessary step in discussing \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi \xi \lambda \psi \omega  phenomena. 

the core propositions of a critical understanding of heritage are best summa rised by laurajane smith (2006: 3-4. emphasis in original), according to whom `all 
heritage is intangible', `not  inherently valuable', and without any `innate meaning'; 
it is, fundamentally, `a discourse', understood as `a form of social practice'. adopting 
a similarly bourdieusian vocabulary, michael herzfeld describes `heritage' in terms 
of `a new global habitus in which dominant interpretations of history spatially reinforce current ideologies' (2010: s259. emphasis in original). interestingly, in a book 
focusing specifically on `built heritage'--a very  tangible matter--franc,oise choay 
(2001) deems the broader field of historic heritage to refer `at once to an institution 
and to a mentality' (2001: 1). these assertions may surprise us when we consider   
that the standard dictionary definitions of `heritage' are anchored in the historical  
social structures of european individualism and property rights. the term--as 
alsayyad (2001: 2) points out--`derives from the old french eritage, meaning property which devolves by right of inheritance in a process involving a series of linked 
hereditary successions'; or--as choay (2001: 1) highlights--it refers to `inherited 
property passed down in accordance with the law, from fathers and mothers to children'. such understandings have played a crucial role in the national movements of 
the nineteenth century, which extended the idea of cross-generational inheritance 

 7 
from the familial domain to emerging national entities, a procedure reliant on a 
significant degree of imaginative construction--as famously argued by anderson 
(1991). in the nationalist toolkit, `heritage' provided the only tangible link between 
the struggles of the present and a future modelled on an idealised past.3 the aims of 
national unity had thus been promoted through an `authorized heritage discourse' 
underpinned by technical and aesthetic expertise, and institutionalised in state 
administrative bodies (smith, 2006: 11). this eurocentric experience and  historical 
habitus was later given universal recognition, and among the organisations whose 
primary role is heritage administration--what smith (2006: 87) calls `authorizing 
institutions of heritage'--the one with the greatest authority today is unesco's 
1972 world heritage convention.4

one aspect of `heritage' that plays a critical role in understanding the mecha nisms of conflict in populated heritage sites--the foremost arenas of  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi -
tion--is its relation to historical `memory'. in this respect, the institutionalisation 
of heritage has again played an important role. as walsh (1992: 87) argues, `those 
who decide what is worthy of preservation and how it should be preserved, are 
basically deciding what is worth remembering'; and since historical memory rarely 
goes uncontested, authorising institutions and discourses also decide  from whose 
perspective it will be remembered. tunbridge and ashworth (1996) accurately point 
out the exclusionary nature of heritage, as it can logically only belong to  one group 
of people, and therefore `any creation of heritage from the past disinherits someone 
completely or partially, actively or potentially' (1996: 21). it is the political function 

  3  it is ironic but true, as schildgen (2008: 167) finds, that `in europe in the nineteenth century, recovering 

the medieval heritage became one of the cultural means to build nationalism, even though the euro pean middle ages had no political entity parallel to the modern nation'.
  4  among the earliest specialised national institutions and legal devices were the 1807  danish royal 

commission for antiquities, the 1882 ancient monuments protection act in britain, or the 1904 german 
heimatschutz (walsh 1992: 70-72). internationally, the charter of athens was adopted in 1931, in 1964 
the international charter for the conservation and restoration of monuments and sites (venice charter), 
and in 1965 the international council on monuments and sites (icomos). the spanish historical heritage law (ley del patrimonio histo'rico espan~ol) was adopted in 1985, some months after the first world 
heritage site designations--including to the alhambra in granada--were assigned in spain.

8
of `heritage' in promoting and undermining claims to power and legitimacy which is 
being denounced by critical approaches.

theorists have most often addressed the relationship between built heritage 
and memory by identifying opposing cognitive mechanisms at play. choay (2001), 
for instance, distinguishes between `affective memory' and `cognitive memory', and 
relates them to `monuments' and `historic monuments' respectively. following alois 
riegl's (1903 [1982]) insights, she argues that while `monuments' are human uni versals deliberately erected for commemorative and affective purposes--a function 
gradually erased by modernity due to the development of more effective mnemonic 
techniques--the `historical monument' is a european invention, whose value and 
meaning is cognitively constituted  a posteriori. similarly, nora (1989: 13) contrasts 
a lived, embodied, `true' memory with a modern, `archival' one, famously advocat ing a scholarly endeavour to salvage the former. yet, while in this sense designated 
heritage sites are `historic monuments' governed by `cognitive' or `archival' memory, 
the memorial function they play locally can be highly complex and contradictory. 
positing the same dialectic, herzfeld (1991) has addressed precisely this complex ity when, while looking at the temporal aspects of everyday life in a cretan town of 
mixed venetian and ottoman urban heritage, he differentiated between `social' and 
`monumental' time in the struggle over the ownership of local history. the difficult 
relationship between heritage and memory comes to the fore in many situations 
where sites are being reclaimed as group heritage by different factions, such as in the 
case of the great mosque of cordoba or in the albayzi'n of granada (rogozen-soltar, 
2007; ruggles, 2010; schildgen, 2008: chp. 4). essentially, heritage sites are what 
nora (1989) calls lieux de memoire; such `places of memory' are `simple and ambigu ous, natural and artificial, at once immediately available in concrete sensual experi ence and susceptible to the most abstract elaboration. indeed, they are lieux in three 
senses of the word--material, symbolic, and functional' (1989: 17-18).

returning to our  lieux, the historical heritage of albayzi'n has entertained 
the memory of many over the past decades, coalescing with the regional nation alist movements that emerged in the late 1970s following the death of francisco 

 9 
franco. according to dietz (2004), classically, andalusian nationalism has built on 
three sources to emphasise the region's particularity: the ` gitano legacy', the ` \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi  
legacy' and the `moro legacy'. the gitano legacy is centred on the art of flamenco and 
a romanticised vision of the `gypsy way of life' which has continuously increased 
in popularity since the late 1950s (dietz, 2004: 1095). the religious  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \theta  reflect 
popular catholic traditions, and revolve around local patron saints and competing 
religious fraternities. the albayzi'n is central to festivities such as the holy week 
processions or the festival of the crosses  (fiesta de las cruces ) involving the adorn ment of the countless stone crosses skirting the streets and squares of the neigh bourhood. these deeply rooted expositions of christian faith and popular culture 
starkly contrast with the urban features relying on the moro--or moorish--legacy, the 
latter building chiefly on neo-moorish decorative architecture, and more recently on 
the presence of north-african migrants (see  figures 1 and 2). for many regionalist 
groups, the islamic middle ages represent the historical period when the essence 
of andalusian nationhood was formed, and the memory of  al-andalus--of moorish 
spain--still haunts spanish society today. it is often invoked in political discourse, 
emphasising either the vision of a `clash of civilisations' or, on the contrary, the idyl lic ideal of  convivencia--the assumed peaceful cohabitation of christians, muslims 
and jews during moorish times (abend, 2008; coleman, 2008; garci'a-sa'nchez, 2014; 
hirschkind, 2014; rogozen-soltar, 2012a; 2012b; sua'rez-navaz, 2004: chp. 7).

what the three `legacies' have in common, however, is that they have all been 
redressed for tourist consumption; even the `holy week of granada' has been des ignated as a `fiesta of international tourist interest' by the state department for 
tourism in october 2009. world heritage designation further transforms historic 
heritage into a `brand', a `trademark', by acting as an `authenticity stamp', whereas 
it is precisely the authenticity of a place that may dilapidate in the process (raki \pi , 
2007: 216). while from one perspective--adopting the phraseology of unesco--
the different `legacies' are being given universal recognition, their commodification  
can also be seen as a `neoliberal hijacking of history'--in the fitting words of 
herzfeld (2010).

10
figure 2: moorish style doors (author's photographs).
figure 1: palm sunday procession along calle elvira (author's photograph).
 11 

for the albayzi'n, becoming a world heritage site also contributed to the con solidation of its `myth'--propagated by orientalisations like the one we witnessed 
in lorca's prose--now institutionally proclaimed (cabrera medina, 2009). for 
unesco, `much of the significance of the albayzi'n lies in the medieval town plan 
with its narrow streets and small squares and in the relatively modest houses in 
moorish and andalusian style that line them' (icomos, 1994: 64). the logic of 
\gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi \xi \lambda \psi \omega  further demands that the human and social `architecture' of the 

neighbourhood enhance this  universal significance, introducing a value system 
by which forms of population change that do not necessarily adhere to classical   
patterns of gentrification become economically advantageous for the global forces 
of `cultural capitalization' (kowalski, 2011). at the same time, the \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \delta ff urban 
space morphs into a symbolic battlefield for different `legacies' competing over the 
ownership of historical memory.

3 albayzi'n, `a neighbourhood destined to be inhabited'
the albayzi'n is a divisive neighbourhood among granadinos. surveys have shown 
that, on the one hand, it is the most rejected and disliked district among the young 
population, while, on the other hand, its `noble' parts are where most people would 
like to live (ferna'ndez gutie'rrez and jime'nez bautista, 2000). one reason for the 
high levels of rejection, contend ferna'ndez gutie'rrez and jime'nez bautista (2000), 
is that the medieval urban morphology and its askew character make it hard to be 
approached by car, and that the youngsters especially find it difficult to orientate 
within the neighbourhood. yet, as the local researchers conclude, `we, granadan   
citizens, prefer and/or fantasize about being able to live in the "noble" parts of the 
idyllic neighbourhood of albayzi'n' (2000: 275).

this paradox is explained by the discrepancies in the quality of housing in dif ferent parts of the neighbourhood. the upper-- noble--segments are dominated 
by  ca'rmenes, large closed-off estates serving mostly as weekend- or holiday resi dences to wealthy granadinos. 5 the lower streets, meanwhile, are characterised by 

  5  originating from the andalusian arab word  karm (meaning `vineyard'), the  ca'rmen is a traditional 

andalusian estate composed of a house and a series of gardens and orchards. originally open spaces, 

12
older and ruinous buildings, which nevertheless are among the historically most   
significant. they have been the focal points of the various urban rehabilitation   
projects undertaken since the unesco world heritage designation, and have in 
recent years become attractive to the moroccan migrant community, international 
students and alternative youths, following a long period of abandonment and   
deterioration (roso'n lorente, 2008). older residents still recall the time when the 
lower parts of the neighbourhood became depopulated; manuel, for instance, 
 reminisces about the old days of that crowded, narrow street we first turned onto on 
our imaginary stroll in the opening paragraph:

in the seventies and eighties it used to be a vegetable market, ideal for shop ping on your way back from town. you could find everything there, not like 
today, this cheap junk they sell to tourists, but everyday things, food, clothes  
. . . and then, i don't know why, probably because the houses were in such a 
bad condition that they were about to collapse, this area was abandoned. in 
those years many people left albayzi'n and moved to the outskirts where they 
could buy a new-built apartment with all the amenities they could wish for. 
(manuel, interviewed by author, 13 april 2011)6

the renovation of the buildings has been more or less successful, with yet much to 
be done. at the same time, as hita alonso (1996) observed, the aim of `rehabilitating' 
a historical neighborhood has shifted in both discourse and practice toward `revi talization', denoting a more dynamic process involving active social planning. the 
verdict is that `the albayzi'n is a neighborhood destined to be inhabited' (de pablos 
and cabrera medina, 2005: 267).

the two main local institutions involved in projects of urban revitalisation at 
the time of the fieldwork were the  albaici'n-granada agency--under the auspices 
of granada city council --and the  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \pi \upsilon \lambda \upsilon \pi \phi \psi  \omega fffifl\delta  \phi ff ffi\sigma \xi \lambda \pi flffl\psi --belonging to 

they are today `closed paradises', isolated from curious gazes by thick walls (barrios rozu'a, 2002).   
in figure 2 (left) we can see the gate of ca'rmen de la media luna.
  6  interviewee names have been changed to maintain the anonymity of the sources.

 13 
a public sector company of the government of andalusia. in carrying out their 
respective duties the two institutions are also taking a stance on the future of the 
neighbourhood, and their opinions and objectives often conflict, not least because 
the local and regional governments have long been led by competing political 
parties.7 

the albaici'n-granada agency was established in 1998 to manage the european 
funds for urban revitalization and, according to its website, `besides its statutory 
duties, as permanent observatory of albaici'n, of safeguarding the values for which it 
has been designated world heritage by the unesco, is in charge since 2008 of managing the tourist plan of the city of granada' (agencia albaici'n-granada, n.d.). this 
dual commitment reflects the institutionalisation of the blend between heritage and 
tourism that describes all world heritage sites. however, in populated sites exposed 
to processes of heritagification, it also determines the constitution of their inhab itants. in this respect, the  agency is more inclined towards a fluid, flexible vision 
for the neighbourhood, and tends to agree with the pragmatic argument shared by 
private investors, that `if we wouldn't have the tourists and the students, granada 
would disappear!' (angel, manager of a real-estate agency, interviewed by author,   
19 april 2011). according to the managing director of the agency, `we must facilitate, 
not impose but  facilitate hotels', with the condition that `a hotel should always be 
in an old, renovated house, keeping everything as it was' (interviewed by author,   
28 april 2011).

the \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \pi \upsilon \lambda \upsilon \pi \phi \psi  \omega fffifl\delta , on the other hand, has as its main objective `to fix the 
population, to stabilize it, including attracting new residents', and is more inclined 
to the view shared by many residents that the neighbourhood is slowly turning into 
a `thematic park'.  as its technical director expresses it, `i find it good to have hous ing for tourists, but when everything becomes that, we can no longer speak of a 
neighbourhood, right?' (interviewed by author, 15 april 2011). the  \omega fffifl\delta  has been 

  7 the  junta de andaluci'a  (government of andalusia) is the   devolved institution representing the   

autonomous community of andalusia. since its constitution in june 1979 it has been uninterruptedly  
governed by the socialist party (psoe), while the city council has been under the administration of 
the conservative popular party (pp) since 2003.

14
managing renovation works since 2002, gradually extending its mission from lower 
albayzi'n to the entire district. not long before my fieldwork, it had moved its head quarters from the city centre to a newly renovated building on the  caldereri'a--a 
street famous for its oriental souvenir shops--this way getting physically closer to 
the neighbourhood. this move, according to its director, was essential in order to 
reinforce the institution's image of being an organic part of the neighbourhood and 
sharing the aims of its inhabitants, rather than being perceived as an administra tive unit belonging to the distant regional government. instead of `the expulsion of 
residents and the creation of a building that would serve as a hotel, student accom modation, or for people who come for the weekends'--as the director deems to be 
happening all too often with projects led by the rival  agency--the \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi  sets certain 
requirements for those participating in their programmes: `when people receive our 
aid, they have to guarantee that for a certain period they maintain the old tenants, 
who will pay a low rent, a protected rent [renta protegida]' (technical director of the 
\pi \xi \sigma \upsilon \phi \psi \omega \psi ff\upsilon ff\psi fifl \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi , interviewed by author, 15 april 2011).

at the time of the fieldwork around six hundred houses had already been   
renovated, and the director of the  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi  expressed his satisfaction with the progress 
achieved in socially stabilizing the neighbourhood. by `protecting' the rent, the 
government was admittedly pursuing the double aim of keeping in local residents, 
while encouraging a diverse and intercultural future for the neighbourhood. the  
first low-rent apartments in houses renovated by the  \pi \xi \sigma \upsilon \phi \psi \omega \psi ff\upsilon ff\psi fifl \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi  were 
leased in 2007 `to youngsters and immigrants' (technical director, interviewed 
by author, 15 april 2011), a move which, nevertheless, displeased many of the 
residents. as maria put it: 

they lease some apartments on protected rent . . . to immigrants or young 
delinquents who have just come out from prison, to young solitary mothers, 
to people with problems. they say that they are helping the most vulnerable 
in society, and we agree that they need help and support. but what they 
do, they do it with a [hidden] reason; i don't know what it is--perhaps to 
scare those who still didn't sell--but they have something in mind; because 

 15 

the neighbourhood is becoming more dangerous. . . (maria, interviewed by 
author, 11 april 2011)

while the ulterior motives behind the social planning undertaken by local authori ties may be less sinister than assumed by many older residents, it nevertheless fully 
conforms to the values of heritagification. north-african migrants are of particular 
significance due to the assumed `authenticity' that their visible presence can provide 
to the marketable moorish imagery that earned the albayzi'n `universal' recognition. 
it is thus unsurprising that both the  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \pi \upsilon \lambda \upsilon \pi \phi \psi  \omega fffifl\delta  and the albaici'n-granada 
agency, despite their different politics and many disagreements, agree upon the   
benefits of arab-muslim presence.

4 immigration, islam and the memory of moorish spain
immigrant islam beyond the aesthetics of orientalia
contemporary immigration to spain began early on in the democratisation pro cess at the end of the 1970s, and intensified during the following decade. besides   
hispanophone south-americans, the largest group among the new arrivals was that 
of north africans, the majority from morocco (izquierdo escribano, 1992; lo'pez 
garci'a, 1993). this period marked the radical transition of spain from a country 
of emigration to one of immigration, a hitherto unfamiliar position for spanish 
 society. in the year in which my fieldwork was conducted, 6.7% (16,098 people) 
of the granadan population had been migrants; of these, 3,513 (21.8%) were of 
moroccan origin (ine, 2011). 

many of the moroccan migrants in granada have discovered a niche economic 
opportunity in setting up or finding employment in souvenir shops trading in goods 
that could be described as `orientalia', and in this way reinforcing the `moorish' 
 character of the neighbourhood which attracts millions of tourists every year 
(roso'n lorente, 2008). although the stigmatisation of migrants and islamophobic 
sentiments has been increasing since the beginning of spain's immigration expe rience, the involuntary contribution of the moroccan migrant community to the   
revitalisation of the albayzi'n is acknowledged both by the local authorities and 

16
some older residents. for manuel, although he considers the merchandise sold in 
the souvenir shops `cheap junk', the fact that the streets of lower albayzi'n finally 
have a purpose is unquestionably a positive development:

when the moors [ moros] came --i think it was in the beginning of the 90s, 
the end of the 80s--they opened these shops you see today. if you ask me, 
there are problems with them, but if you ask me, it's better to have them 
than to have no one. it is better to have these shops than to be totally 
depopulated. (manuel, interviewed by the author, 13 april 2011)

the managing director of the  albaici'n-granada agency expresses a similar opinion 
regarding moroccan migrants and their ethnic businesses:

the muslims, the moroccans to be precise, they are very good for the neighbourhood, contrary to what many people are saying. i find it positive. i find 
it very positive to have people of other nationalities and religions. i say 
this as a catholic, because that is what i am, it is not that i am muslim or   
anything. (interviewed by author, 28 april 2011)

at the same time, the  agency is aiming for a balance between the moorish and the 
rural-popular legacies of the albayzi'n. as the director stresses, `we need to settle 
artisans, because that's a very local activity. like the moroccans who have their shops 
underneath their flats, we also need artisans living above their workshops' (manag ing director of the albaici'n-granada agency, interviewed by author, 28 april 2011). 
needless to say, re-enacting the artisanal heritage is no less a fiction than the one 
represented by the moroccan souvenir vendors; and paradoxically, the artisanal economy of the neighbourhood was sentenced to death by the earliest post-reconquista 
urban reforms in the sixteenth century, with the partial vaulting of the river darro--
separating the albayzi'n from the hill of the alhambra--that had been essential for 
the artisans to easily dispose of their waste (isac marti'nez de carvajal, 2007).

due to the special role of muslim migrants in the local economy, islamophobic 
sentiments are complemented with an islamophilia that can simultaneously better 

 17 
accommodate immigrants while at the same time making them feel ` "instrumentalised" by orientalist tourism policies' (dietz, 2004: 1101). raising the question of  
authenticity, the products and vendors are expected to create a supposed  oriental 
atmosphere acting upon all five senses. this, of course, is a more general characteristic of the fusion between heritage and tourism. as boniface and fowler (1993: 5)  
point out, `tourism distorts reality, obliging people to produce themselves for tourist consumption'. this also holds true for places. the process of ` engazement'--as 
alsayyad (2001) refers to it--is one `through which the gaze transforms the mate rial reality of the built environment into a cultural imaginary' (2001: 4). in the 
albayzi'n this cultural imaginary is that of a reborn  al-andalus complete with its 
urban, human and sensorial features. these provide the neighbourhood with a 
capacity for heritagification that the alhambra lacks, the latter being a historic 
monument whose meaning and significance is frozen in time. despite resting on 
the higher ground of historical authenticity, the alhambra will nevertheless remain 
unable to emulate the experiential simulacrum of the albayzi'n. in the transfiguring process of `engazement'--to draw a geological analogy--while the alhambra 
serves as the marble of moorish heritage, the albayzi'n acts as its soapstone.

for many residents it is precisely the oriental feel--authentic or otherwise--of the 
neighbourhood which is displeasing:

we don't have anything against [the moroccan migrants], it is everyone's 
right to live and make a living wherever they want. but they need to learn 
a few things [about] how to behave, because every country has its own 
rules, and in spain we usually keep our merchandise inside the shop; 
but they put it out on the street, as you could see, and these streets are 
much narrower than a normal street. if you also put your merchandise 
out there, then no one can pass. . . it is terrible when you go to town, 
and you have to squeeze. . . and the vendors are also out there all day 
long,  sitting on their small chairs with their legs outstretched, and they 
wouldn't move an inch if you wanted to pass. . . (maria, interviewed by 
the author, 11 april 2011) 

18
as a result of such practices, the streets of lower albayzi'n become sites for   
everyday symbolic clashes between opposing manifestations of  habitus, which fits 
into the more general controversy over the presence of  otherness--especially islamic 
otherness--in diverse european public spaces (see go"le, 2014).

to understand the wider struggle over the ownership of local historical heritage, 
however, one must look beyond the aesthetics of  orientalia. the popular denomination of north-african and middle-eastern migrants as `moros' introduces a deeper 
dimension than that of anti-migrant prejudices. garci'a-sa'nchez (2014) points out 
that `moro' had initially referred to the `north african muslim armies', then to the 
medieval inhabitants `of mixed arab and berber origin' of al-andalus, before becoming `a naturalized, albeit pejorative, category to refer to contemporary moroccan 
immigrants' (2014: 44-45). due to this heavy semantic load, the term enhances fears 
that the migrants are about to `take over' the neighbourhood, and it raises concerns 
that the assumed `takeover' could be seen as an inherited right instead of a clear sign 
of the residents' openness and hospitality:

i have nothing against them,  everyone with their religion ; they are coming 
here because we invited them, because they are good for the economy . . . but 
now we have gone too far, and they are everywhere. it is disturbing for us to 
see their women, how they dress, how they are treated; this, we don't do in 
spain. they are trying to take over, this is what i think. and the government   
allows them to do what they want; but what they don't see is that  it's   
happening all over again , and in couple of years it will be too late; we'll be 
living in morocco. (carlos, interviewed by author, 21 april 2011)

it becomes obvious from the concerns voiced by carlos that the issue is not primarily  
about immigration but about islam, and the fact that `it's happening all over 
again' clearly connects present-day phenomena with the moorish `invasion' of the   
8th century. carlos's position replicates wider racialised and gendered european   
discourses on islam that not only prevail in popular rhetoric but have also become 
deeply impregnated in everyday- and professional practices (rogozen-soltar, 2012a; 

 19 
2012b; scott, 2007). as rogozen-soltar has conclusively argued, `[i]n granada, these 
gendered parameters for categorizing immigrants are further compounded by the 
locally resonant, historically rooted fears of a moorish "reinvasion", a militarized 
vision that is distinctly masculinized' (2012a: 644; see also flesler, 2008). such fears 
have remained latent in spanish society for centuries, resurfacing almost instantaneously with the earliest reappearance of the muslim other. in one of the earliest assessments of the incipient north-african immigration, bernabe' lo'pez garci'a (1993), 
the renowned historian of morocco, had sought to show that the new geographic 
patterns of settlement and economic activity precisely replicate those of sixteenthcentury moriscos--muslim converts to christianity following the banning of islam--
before their final expulsion by 1614.

while immigrant islam is certainly fuelling such superficial assessments of a 
`return' of the moors, the main ideological conflict over heritage and memory is 
being played out around the deeper historical relevance of local islam,  primarily 
between catholic traditionalists and spanish converts to islam, congregants of the 
islamic community in spain  ( comunidad islamica en espan~a ), initially known as 
the society for the return of islam in spain upon its creation in 1980 (abend, 2008; 
bahrami, 1998; calderwood, 2014; rogozen-soltar, 2012b). it is in the context of 
the conversion movement that the emphasis placed by the director of the albaici'n-
granada agency on him not being a muslim, in the excerpt above, gains particular 
significance.

indigenous islam and contested heritage
members of the islamic community pose a particular threat to those concerned about 
the `takeover' of islam in the neighbourhood, as their right to presence is hard to dispute. while north african migrants have the `right to live and make a living wherever 
they want' as long as they `learn a few things [about] how to behave' (maria, quoted 
above), and as for their faith, `everyone with their religion' (carlos, quoted above), the 
spanish converts were referred to in the interviews i conducted with local residents 
as `disturbed', `mentally challenged', `terrorists' who are `selling out their country' and 
their `inherited religion'. the converts are primarily incriminated with committing 

20
the unforgivable sin of renouncing their inherited catholic identity: `their parents 
were catholics, their grandparents were catholics . . . you can be a bad christian, and 
going to church today is not the same as it used to be in my time, but to give away 
what you have inherited from your parents, this, i cannot understand' (carlos, interviewed by author, 21 april 2011).

the history of local islam can be traced back to the late 1970s, when a group 
of young spanish hippies living south of granada, in the mountainous region of 
alpujarra, converted to islam. the director of the local mosque, himself already 
born into the religion, recollects the memories of his parents, onetime members 
of the first hippy colony: `it was an age when there were many hippies looking 
for alternatives and voicing their opposition to the system, and they found islam. 
they realised that islam offers satisfactory answers to many of the issues they were 
raising' (interviewed by author, 18 april 2011). the conversions have been since 
the beginning part of a larger international movement initiated by a scottish con vert who had taken the muslim name of shaykh abdalqadir as-sufi al murabit and 
became the representative of a moroccan sufi order in the 1960s, later establishing 
the murabitun world movement with centres in london and california (abend, 
2008; calderwood, 2014; coleman, 2008). the decision to make granada the heart 
of the movement is a fusion between local historical symbolism and global anti-capitalist critique. the higher aim of the movement is to restructure global economic 
and political mechanisms following islamic principles; according to as-sufi's vision, 
`men must begin to trade and exchange, hand to hand, and transfer across distance 
without recourse to the financial instruments and institutions of capitalism . . . 
ahead lies vast expansion for the post-terrorist and post-political stage of muslim 
growth' (as-sufi, 2014).8 

the conversion movement also represents the symbolic antithesis of the official 
discourse regarding the moorish past and the reconquista. based on ignacio olagu"e's 
controversial `islamic revolution' hypothesis--itself originating in andalusian nationalist thought (calderwood, 2014)--according to which spain had not been invaded 

 8   for an analysis of the movement's economic ideals, see bubandt (2009).

 21 
by muslims in the 8th century, but rather the local population adopted islam, many 
of the new converts see themselves as the spiritual heirs of  al-andalus (hirschkind, 
2014). some, like abdul haqq, the spokesperson of the  islamic community, do not 
even consider themselves converts on these grounds:

i was born a muslim, it's just that i wasn't conscious of it until i was in my 
late twenties. . . . the period of catholic spain is actually very brief over the 
long view of history. when the first muslims arrived here from africa via 
gibraltar they were few. the majority of muslims in spain were natives who 
converted freely and naturally. (quoted in sharrock, 2003: n. pag.)

the `islamic revolution' hypothesis is similar in its teleology to the attempts made 
by post-reconquista granadino officials to prove the historical precedence of local 
christianity over islam. in the effort to replace the cultural vestiges of the moorish 
past, the unearthing in 1595 of a series of `lead books' in the hills bordering the 
albayzi'n had been crucial. although later proved to be forgeries, the books attrib uted to saint cecil--a 1st century missionary considered the evangeliser of illiberis 
(the roman settlement preceding the medieval town of granada)--made it possible 
to construe the moorish era as merely a disruption to the christian continuity of   
granada, and attracted the worship of local catholics for decades (harris, 2007).

while the historical accuracy of olagu"e's thesis has been just as systematically 
refuted as had the authenticity of the lead books, they both attempt to validate 
contemporary claims by establishing the continuity of a spiritual heritage. both 
propositions were, in their time and age, co-opted by local institutions and move ments for their respective purposes. in the seventeenth century the case of the 
lead books had been vigorously promoted by the city council, and `[i]n position ing itself as the defender of the city's most ancient christian antiquity, granada's 
municipal council acquired some of the historical continuity it lacked' (harris, 
2007: 135). today, the  islamic revolution thesis is directly or indirectly promoted 
by institutions such as the andalusi legacy foundation ( fundacio'n el legado 
andalusi' ) established in 1993 and working under the aegis of the government 

22
of andalusia (calderwood, 2014). the regional government was also involved in 
the republication of olagu"e's work in 2004, a questionable move according to 
 historian alejandro garci'a sanjua'n:

the institutional support for the publication of a text so notoriously toxic to 
historical knowledge like that of olagu"e, is of enormous significance given 
the usual limitations to this kind of aid. i do not know if the andalusian   
government applies similarly insufficient quality control parameters in 
other areas of their competence, but in any case, we must also acknowl edge its role in promoting a fraudulent historiographical product. (garci'a 
sanjua'n, 2013: 104)

it is fair to assume that the government's decision to fund and promote the book 
was not taken based on stringent historical considerations but, rather, driven by 
the logic of heritagification, which assigns value to a certain interpretation of local 
historical heritage. if the albayzi'n is to live up to its  universal value and become 
again the old moorish neighbourhood, it must  acquire some of the historical con tinuity it lacks. the conversion movement associated with the  islamic community 
therefore plays just as significant a role in enacting the  essence of indigenous 
islam--paradoxically despite the fact that many of the converts are non-spanish 
westerners--as do the moroccan migrants in providing the neighbourhood with 
an appropriate  aesthetics. the antagonism between the two muslim groups (for 
a more detailed ethnography of this, see rogozen-soltar, 2012b) is of course not 
restricted to the function they play in representing islam, but also present in 
their access to economic and political power. for instance, the majority of the 
shops staffed by moroccan migrants are in fact owned by convert muslims (roso'n  
lorente, 2008: 146), and it was the  islamic community, rather than the migrant 
community, which managed to raise the funds and obtain the administrative 
approval to erect the great mosque of granada ( mezquita mayor de granada), the 
first official islamic place of worship in the albayzi'n since the consecration of 
mosques in january 1500 (contreras, 1979).

 23 
the great mosque as emblem of \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi \xi \lambda \psi \omega 
the great mosque has been a controversial issue in the neighbourhood for decades, 
not least for its location, next to the church of san nicola's and the most popular 
tourist viewpoint of the alhambra, the  square packed with tourists and street artists  
where our imaginary walk in the opening paragraph ended (figure 3) (for a detailed 
discussion of the controversies surrounding the construction of the mosque, see 
coleman, 2008; and roso'n lorente, 2008). the land where the mosque was built had 
been empty and abandoned for a long time before the  islamic community acquired 
it in 1981. the director of the mosque recalls seeing that plot of land as a `dunghill' 
in his childhood, and telling his classmates: `this is where the mosque will be built' 
(interviewed by author, 18 april 2011). according to him, the decision to build the 
mosque where it now stands was not a symbolic decision: `it was just a good deal 
in a very beautiful place. today you would need a fortune to buy a spot like this 
in the albayzi'n'. however, according to a convert working as a real-estate agent in 
the neighbourhood since the 1980s, the view of the alhambra must have been a 
sentimental factor, `something to connect the mosque with the muslim past' (angel, 
interviewed by author, 19 april 2011).

the mosque was inaugurated in july 2003, but getting there took more than 
twenty years. roso'n lorente (2008: 404) observes four stages in the development of 
the project from its initial planning and presentation (1984-1992), followed by the 
approval of the city council and its fierce contestation by the locals (1993-1994), 
through a period of financial difficulties and changes in the actors involved (1995-
1998), to the final construction work (1999-2003).

for local catholics the mosque remains a clear sign of the `corruption within 
the city hall', as manuel explains: `there is something fishy, because if you wanted 
to build a church, they would never allow it' (interviewed by author, 13 april 2011). 
nevertheless, local christian residents had been successful in persuading the authorities to demand that the planned minaret be shortened so that it would not overtop 
the spire of the nearby san nicola's church (coleman, 2008; roso'n lorente, 2008). 
the approval of the local authorities, however, perfectly dovetails with the `authorised 

24
heritage discourse' regarding the albayzi'n. it is hard to fathom in retrospect the fears 
voiced by locals back in 1993, that `the construction of the mosque might have a negative effect on unesco's decision to declare the neighbourhood as world heritage' 
(roso'n lorente, 2008: 409). such concerns were proved unfounded only a year later. 
the positive decision also disproved the residents' claim that `the neighbourhood is 
known for its peasant-gypsy [ payo-gitano] ancestry, and the muslim connotation it 
might acquire would not be true' (roso'n lorente, 2008: 408-9). from the perspec tive of heritagification, the existence of a mosque in what presents itself as a moorish 
district brings added value even if the edifice itself is newly built and bears no historical significance.

the islamic community's spokesman accurately predicted at the inauguration 
of the mosque that `the call to prayer is undoubtedly going to be a tourist attrac tion, because even though it is so normal in the rest of the muslim world it will have 
a special sound here' (sharrock, 2003. emphasis added). since then the mosque 

figure 3: the albayzi'n seen from alhambra. note the crowd on san nicola's square, 

below the church spire on the upper left side. to the right we can see the shorter 
minaret of the great mosque (author's photograph).

 25 
and the adjacent islamic centre have been welcoming believers and visitors, its 
open garden overwhelmed by tourists during opening hours (figure 4). the centre 
provides resources for documentation on the moorish past, and organises various   
public events and conferences. the mosque appears now in every tourist guide and 
map, and it is undoubtedly the newest building in the neighbourhood to become 
immortalised on hundreds or thousands of photographs each day. through this 
imagery reproduction, the great mosque is incessantly consolidating its significance 
as an emblem of the moorish heritage, donning the characteristics of a simulacrum 
as proposed by baudrillard (1988) in his famous biblical paraphrase; accordingly, 
 representations of the mosque are not concealing the truth, but are `the truth which 
conceals that there is none' (1988: 166). the great mosque thus represents the   
highest level of heritagification, a step beyond its  ideology--if this is understood as 
`a false representation of reality' (baudrillard, 1988: 172)--in not only masking the 
absence of a real connection with the local historical heritage, but itself becoming 
that reality.

more than a decade since the completion of the great mosque, there are now 
plans in place for further development. although the tensions around the mosque 
are far from having dissipated, its director is optimistic and believes that `things have 
now changed, and i am certain that the city hall would agree with the extension 
of the mosque' (interviewed by author, 18 april 2011). yet, those who have been 

figure 4: the great mosque; its open garden on the left, and the private prayer hall 

on the right (author's photographs).

26
opposing the building of the mosque in the first place would undoubtedly find it 
paradoxical that while `there is not much available space left in the albayzi'n' (angel, 
director of a real-estate agency, interviewed by author, 19 april 2011), there is still 
room for a bigger mosque.

5 conclusion
the aim of this article has been to examine the transformations in the  human architecture of the granadan neighbourhood of albayzi'n following its designation as 
world heritage site by unesco. various aspects of this broad topic have already 
received well-deserved, intense scholarly attention: projects of urban rehabilita tion (barrios rozu'a, 2002; cabrera medina, 2009; castello' nica's, 2003; hita alonso, 
1996), processes of gentrification (duque calvache, 2010; duque calvache, susino 
and de pablos,  2013; ferna'ndez gutie'rrez and jime'nez bautista, 2000; roso'n lor ente, 2010), the emergence of new muslim communities (abend, 2008; dietz, 2004; 
flesler, 2008; rogozen-soltar, 2012a; 2012b), the ensuing cultural diversity and conflicts (bahrami, 1998; roso'n lorente, 2008; roso'n lorente and dietz, 2011), and the 
neighbourhood's relationship with its moorish past (calderwood, 2014; coleman, 
2008; hirschkind, 2014; rogozen-soltar, 2007) have all been explored in depth. the 
contribution of this article, therefore, is to articulate a concept of  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \lambda \upsilon \phi \pi \xi \lambda \psi \omega  
which connects the urban, human and symbolic aspects of change. as i have argued, 
urban `heritage' represents not a physical reality but an ideological principle which 
has the power to reshape historic monuments and urban settings, and endow them 
with new meanings. it revives and settles disputes over the ownership of historical 
memory, subjecting claims, interpretations and practices to the logic of `universal 
value'. through the process of heritagification, the ideology of heritage not only creates alternative realities for the global tourism marketplace, but also takes leadership 
in the neoliberal gentrification of populated heritage sites.

the main struggle in the albayzi'n--as in other locations subjected to 
 heritagification--develops around providing the neighbourhood with a future 
 meaning, function and inhabitants. competing perspectives are heavily influenced 
by different conceptions of the past, the main divide stretching between muslim and 

 27 
christian interpretations of the neighbourhood's heritage. the `authorized heritage 
discourse' of institutional actors interested in capitalising on the historical value of 
the albayzi'n favours a more distant moorish past (smith, 2006). the urban  paradox 
of the value system upheld by `heritage' is that buildings and practices of little   
historical significance can become invaluable to the overall vision, as seen in the 
example of the great mosque.

the future of the albayzi'n is unsettled, but it will surely remain characterised 
by the `tragedy of contrasts' noticed by the poet garci'a lorca and the many travel lers drawn to the neighbourhood over the course of history (see, for example, vin~es 
millet, 1999). the struggle over its `true' heritage will remain the main theme in this 
tragedy, and its `truth' will probably only reveal itself in the myriad of romanticised 
and orientalised travel diaries yet to be written. the analysis of heritagification would 
suggest that a shift in the symbolic relationship between the albayzi'n and the palace 
of alhambra is one possible development. while for a long period the albayzi'n had 
mainly served to provide beautiful vistas of the alhambra--the ultimate historic 
monument to moorish spain--through the process of heritagification the alhambra 
itself may become an accessory to the albayzi'n, a mere inanimate image of past glory 
inspiring the utopian ambitions of an organic neighbourhood.

competing interests
the author declares that he has no competing interests.

acknowledgements
the collection of data on which this paper has built was funded by a short research 
travel grant from central european university, budapest.

references 
abend, l  2008 spain's new muslims: a historical romance. in: doubleday, s r 

and coleman, d (eds.)  in the light of medieval spain: islam, the west, and the   
relevance of the past. new york: palgrave macmillan, pp. 133-156.
agencia albaici'n-granada  n.d. presentacio'n. available at:  http://www.albaicingranada.com/seccion.php?s=2 [last accessed 20 february 2014].

28
alsayyad, n 2001 global norms and urban forms in the age of tourism: manufac turing heritage, consuming tradition. in: alsayyad, n (ed.) consuming tradition, 
manufacturing heritage: global norms and urban forms in the age of tourism . 
london: routledge, pp. 1-33.
anderson, b  1991  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon  \phi \psi \delta \delta \omega \pi \xi ff\xi \sigma fifl ffi\sigma ffl\sigma iff\xi \psi \pi fi \psi \pi  ffj\sigma  `'\xi \lambda \xi \pi  \theta \pi \upsilon  ^*'\sigma \theta \upsilon  \psi _

nationalism. london and new york: verso.
*,ssaeoeo/ae ae * 2014 the islamic dinar: a way-stage passed. posted on 11 february. 

available at:  http://www.shaykhabdalqadir.com [last accessed 20 february 
2014].
bahrami, b  1998 a door to paradise: converts, the new age, islam, and the 

past in granada, spain.  city and society , 10(1): 121-132. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1525/city.1998.10.1.121
barrios rozu'a, j m  2002  oeo/ o/!\theta "#$\pi fl %\theta '\theta $fi\psi  i\sigma ''\theta \upsilon \psi & i\psi \pi ffl\xi iff\psi  \omega '!\theta \pi \psi . granada: 

diputacio'n provincial de granada.
baudrillard, j  1988  selected writings  (ed. mark poster). stanford, ca: stanford   

university press.
boniface, p  and  fowler, p j  1993  heritage and tourism in the "global village" . 

london: routledge.
bubandt, n o  2009 gold for a golden age: sacred money and islamic emancipation 

in a global sufi order.  social analysis , 53(1): 103-122. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.3167/sa.2009.530107
cabrera medina, j c 2009 re-construccio'n material y simbo'lica del espacio urbano: 

el albayzi'n de granada patrimonio de la humanidad . granada: university of   
granada.
calderwood, e 2014 the invention of al-andalus: discovering the past and  creating 

the present in granada's islamic tourism sites.  the journal of north african   
studies, 19(1): 27-55. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13629387.2013.862777
castello' nica's, m 2003 la renovacio'n urbana en el albaici'n. granada: comares.
choay, f  2001  the invention of the historical monument . cambridge: cambridge  

university press.

 29 
clifford, j  1986 on ethnographic allegory. in: clifford, j and marcus, g e (eds.) 

writing culture: the poetics and politics of ethnography . berkeley: university of 
california press, pp. 98-121.
coleman, d 2008 the persistence of the past in the albaici'n: granada's new mosque 

and the question of historical relevance. in: doubleday, s r and coleman,   
d (eds.) in the light of medieval spain: islam, the west, and the relevance of the 
past. new york: palgrave macmillan, pp. 157-188.
contreras, l n  1979 la fecha de consagracio'n de las mezquitas y la ereccio'n de la 

colegiata del albaici'n de granada. historia. instituciones. documentos, 6: 219-248.
daugstad k  and kirchengast c  2013 authenticity and the pseudo-backstage of 

agri-tourism.  annals of tourism research ,  43: 170-191. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.annals.2013.04.004
de pablos, j c and cabrera medina, j c 2005 conclusiones: el albaici'n en la encrucijada. in: de pablos, j c (ed.) el albaici'n en la encrucijada. granada: university of 
granada, pp. 243-278.
dietz, g  2004 frontier hybridisation or culture clash? transnational migrant 

communities and sub-national identity politics in andalusia, spain.  journal of ethnic and migration studies , 30(6): 1087-1112. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/1369183042000286269
duque calvache, r 2010 procesos de gentrification de cascos antiguos en  espan~a: 

el albaici'n de granada. unpublished thesis (phd), department of sociology,   
university of granada.
duque calvache, r, susino, j  and de pablos, j  c 2013 atomised gentrification: 

exploring the role of contextual factors in the transformation of the albayzin. 
spaces and flows, 3(3): 29-39. 
evans, g 2002 living in a world heritage city: stakeholders in the dialectic of the 

universal and particular. international journal of heritage studies, 8(2): 117-135. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13527250220143913 
ferna'ndez gutie'rrez, f  and jime'nez bautista, f  2000 preferencias, conflictos y 

usos territoriales en la ciudad de granada. \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi  \psi \xi \upsilon \omega \pi \theta fffi\upsilon \phi , 30: 263-279.

30
flesler, d 2008 contemporary moroccan immigration and its ghosts. in: doubleday, 

s r and coleman, d (eds.) in the light of medieval spain: islam, the west, and the 
relevance of the past. new york: palgrave macmillan, pp. 115-132.
garci'a lorca, f 1994 [1918] impresiones y paisajes. in: garci'a lorca, f (ed.) obras, vi.  

prosa,  1. madrid: akal. pp. 73-196. limited accessibility at:  https://books.
google.com/books?id=ipbbhxc3woec&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=
false [last accessed 20 august 2015].
garci'a-sa'nchez, i m 2014 language and muslim immigrant childhoods: the politics of 

belonging. oxford: blackwell. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118323939
garci'a sanjua'n, a  2013  la conquista isla'mica de la peni'nsula ibe'rica y la tergi \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi  \psi \delta \omega  ff\xi \lambda \xi \psi fifl ffi\delta \omega  ffl\xi i\xi \lambda i\theta fij\lambda `fi \xi \omega  '\delta ^\xi \pi \sigma fi\phi \sigma \lambda `fi. madrid: marcial pons 

ediciones de historia.
go"le, n (ed.) 2014 islam and public controversy in europe. farnham: ashgate.
harris, k a 2007 from muslim to christian granada: inventing a city's past in early 

modern spain. baltimore, md: johns hopkins university press.
herzfeld, m 1991 a place in history: social and monumental time in a cretan town . 

princeton, nj: princeton university press.
herzfeld, m  2009  evicted from eternity: the restructuring of modern rome .  

chicago: university of chicago press. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.7208/chicago/ 
9780226329079.001.0001
herzfeld, m 2010 engagement, gentrification, and the neoliberal hijacking of history. 

current anthropology, 51(s2): s259-s267. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/653420
hirschkind, c 2014 the contemporary afterlife of moorish spain. in: go"le, n (ed.) 

islam and public controversy in europe. farnham: ashgate, pp. 227-240.
hita alonso, c 1996 ge'nesis y evolucio'n del centro urbano de granada: impacto de 

las poli'ticas rehabilitadoras. unpublished thesis (phd), department of sociology, 
university of granada.
icomos 1994 advisory body evaluation, no. 314bis, october 1994. world heritage 

list, pp. 63-65. available at:  http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/314 [last accessed 
25 february 2014].

 31 
ine  2011 revisio'n del padro'n municipal 2011. datos por municipios: granada. 

poblacio'n por sexo, municipios y nacionalidad (principales nacionalidades). 
dataset available at: http://www.ine.es/jaxi/menu.do?type=pcaxis&path=/t20/
e245/&file=inebase [last accessed 25 november 2015].
isac marti'nez de carvajal, a' 2007 historia urbana de granada. la formacio'n de la 

ciudad burguesa. granada: diputacio'n provincial de granada.
izquierdo escribano, a  1992  la inmigracio'n en espan~a (1980-1990).  madrid:  

ministerio de trabajo y seguridad social.
kowalski, a 2011 when cultural capitalization became global practice: the 1972 

world heritage convention. in: bandelj, n and wherry, f f (eds.)  the cultural 
wealth of nations. stanford, ca: stanford university press, pp. 73-89.
lees, l, slater, t and wyly, e 2008 \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \lambda \pi \psi \theta . london: routledge.
lo'pez garci'a, b  1993 inmigracio'n magrebi' en espan~a: introduccio'n. in: lo'pez 

garci'a, b (ed.) inmigracio'n magrebi' en espan~a: el retorno de los moriscos. madrid: 
mapfre, pp. 13-28.
nora, p 1989 between memory and history: les lieux de me'moire. representations, 

26: 7-24. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2928520
raki\omega , t 2007 world heritage: issues and debates. tourism, 55(2): 209-219.
riegl, a 1903 [1982] the modern cult of monuments: its character and its origin.  

oppositions, 25: 21-51.
rogozen-soltar, m  2007 al-andalus in andalusia: negotiating moorish history 

and regional identity in southern spain.  anthropological quarterly,  80(3):  
863-886. available at:  http://www.jstor.org/stable/30052728. doi:  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1353/anq.2007.0046
rogozen-soltar, m 2012a ambivalent inclusion: anti-racism and racist gatekeeping 

in andalusia's immigrant ngos. journal of the royal anthropological institute, 18: 
633-651. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9655.2012.01780.x
rogozen-soltar, m  2012b managing muslim visibility: conversion, immigration, 

and spanish imaginaries of islam.  american anthropologist , 114(4): 611-623. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1433.2012.01518.x

32
roso'n lorente, j  2008 ?el retorno de tariq? comunidades etnorreligiosas en el 

albayzi'n granadino. unpublished thesis (phd), department of social anthropology, university of granada.
roso'n lorente, j  2010 el albayzi'n de granada: un barrio multicultural entre 

la etnificacio'n de la diversidad religiosa y los procesos de gentrificacio'n. in:   
marti'nez-rigol, s (ed.)  la cuestio'n del centro, el centro en cuestio'n . lleida: 
 editorial milenio, pp. 199-133.
roso'n lorente, j  and  dietz, g  2011 ethnicised inter-religious conflicts in   

contemporary granada, spain. in: kousis, m, selwyn, t and clark, d (eds.)   
contested mediterranean spaces: ethnographic essays in honour of charles tilly . 
new york: berghahn books, pp. 264-283.
rubino, s 2005 a curious blend? city revitalisation, gentrification and commodi fication in brazil. in: atkinson, r and bridge, g (eds.)  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \lambda \pi \psi \theta  \pi \theta  \phi  \gamma \omega \psi ff\phi \omega  
context: the new urban colonialism . london: routledge, pp. 230-244. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780203392089_chapter_14
ruggles, d f 2010 the stratigraphy of forgetting: the great mosque of cordoba and 

its contested legacy. in: silverman, h (ed.) contested cultural heritage:  religion, 
nationalism, erasure and exclusion in a global world . new york: springer,   
pp. 51-69.
schildgen, b d 2008 heritage or heresy: preservation and destruction of religious art 

and architecture in europe . new york: palgrave macmillan. doi:  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1057/9780230613157
scott, j 2007 the politics of the veil. princeton, nj: princeton university press.
sharrock, d 2003 granada hears the cry of islam after 500 years. the times, 8 july. 

available at:  http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/world/article1971900.ece 
[last accessed 25 february 2014].
shaw, w 2005 heritage and gentrification: remembering "the good old days" in 

postcolonial sydney. in: atkinson, r and bridge, g (eds.) \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon \phi \lambda \pi \psi \theta  \pi \theta  \phi  \gamma \omega \psi ff\phi \omega 
context: the new urban colonialism. london: routledge, pp. 58-72. doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.4324/9780203392089_chapter_4

2
on arrival in van diemen's land, before disembarking from the transport ship, con victs were grilled about their sentence, prior convictions and former lives. stripped 
to the waist, their bodies were scrutinized for distinguishing characteristics such as 
scars and tattoos. the results of this verbal and physical examination were entered in 
the `black books', used to monitor convicts' conduct in the penal colony and identify 
them should they escape. digitization of these records is being used by the multidisciplinary founders and survivors and digital panopticon projects to carry out largescale analysis of the effects of transportation and penal discipline on the life courses 
of tasmania's convict population and descendants up to 1920. 1 by contrast, in this 
article i trace the past rather than future lives of convicts, focusing on a small sample 
of the 73,000 men, women and children banished to van diemen's land between 
1803 and 1853, when transportation to the colony was abolished. using record linkage, i compare what male convicts told the authorities about their history with documentary evidence of their former lives. tracing individual histories through multiple 
sources, i investigate what convicts revealed to the penal authorities and what they 
concealed in order to explore how the subjects of penal discipline responded to official bureaucracy and interrogation of their lives. in so doing, i illustrate a method for 
reading fragmentary sources, found in traditional and digital archives, that combines 
qualitative and quantitative analysis. i demonstrate the convict authorities relied on 
prisoners' testimony for a fuller, though often incomplete, picture of their offend ing histories. while this raises important questions for how historians evaluate offi cial data on convicts, i show that convict records, when read in tangent with other 
sources, illuminate unexpected detail on individual lives and general characteristics 
of the convict population.

the rise of cultural history in recent decades saw a marked shift across historical 
disciplines from quantitative to qualitative methods of reading. though some scholars continued to employ data analysis, particularly those working on demography, 

 1  founders and survivors: australian life courses in historical context, 1803-1920 ,  http:// 

foundersandsurvivors.org/; the digital panopticon: the global impact of london punishments, 1780-
1925, http://www.digitalpanopticon.org/

 3 
public institutions like asylums and workhouses, and the criminal justice system, 
many social historians abandoned quantitative methodologies to explore the discursive construction of the `social'.2 while historians have studied the emergence of the 
`statistical idea', for instance, as expressing new forms of scientific knowledge and 
social administration, many lost faith in the results of statistical enquiry to expose 
anything other than the epistemological premises and ideological concerns of the 
record makers.3 articles using data analysis to identify cultural habits and patterns 
are rarely found in journals devoted to cultural history or even social history. 

digitization of archival sources, however, combined with the interactive func tionality of web 2.0, is encouraging growing numbers of scholars across the humanities to re-engage with quantitative analysis. much of this work consists of `text 
mining' large bodies of digitized text, such as the old bailey proceedings and the 
tasmanian convict records, and the creation and manipulation of `big data' using 
computational methodologies and corpus linguistics.4 many studies deploy a version 
of the `distant reading' method advocated by franco moretti in his attempt to map 

 2  for notable examples, compare joan wallach scott's use of quantitative social history methods (with 

louise tilly) in women, work and family (new york: holt, rinehart and winston, 1978) with her use 
of discourse theory in gender and the politics of history (new york: columbia university press, 1988); 
and similarly patrick joyce's,  work, society and politics: the culture of the factory in later victorian 
england (brighton: harvester press, 1980), compared with his many studies tracking the discursive 
formation of `the social', beginning with  democratic subjects: the self and the social in nineteenthcentury england (cambridge: cambridge university press, 1994).
 3  for examples see: mary poovey,  making a social body: british cultural formation 1830-64  (chicago: 

university of chicago press, 1995) and a history of the modern fact: problems of knowledge in the sciences of wealth and society (chicago: university of chicago press, 1998); tom crook and glen o'hara 
(eds.), statistics and the public sphere: numbers and the people in modern britain, c. 1800-2000  (new 
york: routledge, 2011).
 4  tim hitchcock, robert shoemaker, clive emsley, sharon howard and jamie mclaughlin, et al.,  the 

old bailey proceedings online, 1674-1913  (www.oldbaileyonline.org, version 7.0, 14 july 2015); 
linc tasmania,  colonial tasmanian family links database  (http://portal.archives.tas.gov.au/menu.
aspx?search=8, 14 july 2015). for an overview of the opportunities afforded by digital resources and 
data analysis, see the digital forum on `processing the past', journal of victorian culture, 15.2 (2010): 
280-96, ed. by james mussell: richard deswarte, `growing the "faith in numbers": quantitative digital  
resources and historical research in the twenty-first century', 281-286; alexis weedon, `digital 
resources and quantitative research', 287-291; michaela mahlberg, `corpus linguistics and the 
study of nineteenth-century fiction', 292-298. 

4
changes in the novel across period, genre and national boundaries. 5 distant reading 
forsakes `close reading' of individual texts, at least in the preliminary stages of investigation, in order to track textual changes that allow analysis of continuity and change 
in social and cultural discourses and the material practices underpinning them. 

this return to quantitative analysis has generated some concern, even among 
its advocates in the digital humanities. tim hitchcock, of the pioneering  old bailey 
online, observes that data mining requires high levels of technical expertise that 
threatens to disengage scholarship from the democratic practice that inspired `his tory from below'. while large-scale analysis of the  old bailey proceedings  might 
recover the agency of the accused by showing how they helped drive the rise of pleabargaining, for example, distant reading can divert attention from individual experience back to the court records that objectified defendants. the distancing effect of 
data mining, intimates hitchcock, might be alleviated by record linkage. to this end, 
the connected databases  london lives and  connected histories, offshoots from the 
old bailey online, allow users to piece together evidence of individual lives from different records.6 

record linkage of this kind requires a different approach to reading data that can 
complement distant reading. i call it `intimate reading': the scrutiny of records from 
multiple sources that permits an exploration of individuals and groups, their interaction with others and their engagement - however unequal - with the record-makers 
and keepers. such reading is necessarily smaller in scope than distant reading, involving examination of `deep' rather than `big' data, but its limited focus enables a more 
intensive form of investigation and extensive contextualization. it demands the 

 5  franco moretti, graphs, maps and trees: abstract models for a literary theory  (london: verso, 2005). 

see also bob nicholson, `counting culture; or, how to read victorian newspapers from a distance', 
journal of victorian culture 17.2 (2012): 238-46.
 6  tim hitchcock and william j. turkel, `the old bailey proceedings, 1674-1913: text mining for evidence 

of court behaviour', paper given at ihr digital history seminar, 16 may 2011; recording and slides 
available  https://historyspot.org.uk/podcasts/digital-history/text-mining-old-bailey-proceedings; 
tim hitchcock, `academic history writing and the headache of  big data', http://historyonics.blogspot.co.uk/2012_01_01_archive.html, 30 january 2012;  connected histories: british history sources, 
1500-1900,  http://www.connectedhistories.org/;  london lives 1690 to 1800: crime, poverty and 
social policy in the metropolis, http://www.londonlives.org/.

 5 
immersive reading practised by micro-historians in recovering the world and mentality of individuals and communities. 7 intimate reading requires historians to get our 
hands dirty in the virtual and paper archives and get up close and personal with our 
subjects. by this means, intimate reading can cast light on what ben heller calls the 
`dark matter of plebeian and middling knowledge and life'.8

here, i show how my practice of intimate reading developed out of investigating 
inmates' experiences of imprisonment and their lives before and after committal to 
great yarmouth gaol and house of correction in the 1830s and 1840s. 9 i begin with 
close reading, the approach i initially used to study interactions between prison ers and their teacher, sarah martin, who worked as a voluntary prison visitor from 
1818 till her death in 1843. focusing on her brief journal entries on her encounters 
with one prisoner, john king, i examine what the teacher thought she knew about 
inmates and what she recognized she could not know with certainty. while martin's 
journals illuminate her understanding of her students' lives and characters, they 
offer only snapshots of inmates themselves, refracted through the visitor's pious 
gaze. from examination of one individual prisoner, therefore, i move outwards to 
reconstruct the experiences of offenders like him. comparisons are drawn between 
statements made by thirty-four male convicts, formerly imprisoned at yarmouth, in 
answer to cross-examination by the penal authorities in van diemen's land com bined with evidence of their lives derived from gaol, census and parish registers. 
social profiling, based on data analysis of this cohort, is then used to help interpret 

 7  clifford geertz, `thick description: toward an interpretive theory of culture', in  the interpretation 

of cultures: selected essays  (new york: basic books, 1973), pp. 3-30. my approach to `intimate read ing' resists the opposition between big data and micro history methodologies drawn by jo guldi and 
david armitage in the history manifesto (cambridge: cambridge university press, 2014). 
 8  ben heller, review of  london lives 1690-1800 - crime, poverty and social policy in the metropolis , 

reviews in history (no. 1001) url: http://www.history.ac.uk/reviews/review/1001. date accessed: 27 
june 2013.
 9  see: helen rogers, `the way to jerusalem: reading, writing and reform in an early victorian 

gaol', past and present, no. 205 (2009): 71-104; `"oh, what beautiful books!" captivated reading in 
an early victorian prison' , victorian studies 55.1 (autumn 2012): 57-84; `singing in gaol: christian 
instruction and inmate culture in the nineteenth century', prison service journal 199 (2012): 35-43; 
`kindness and reciprocity: liberated prisoners and christian charity in early nineteenth-century england', journal of social history 47.3 (spring 2014): 721-45.

6
john king's testimony to his penal interrogators and to conduct an intimate reading 
of his life and passions via the description of his elaborate tattoos. intimate reading, 
integrating qualitative and quantitative analysis, provides insights into individual 
experiences of criminalization while raising new questions that might be explored 
by larger-scale studies of prison and convict populations.

i. close reading: `i am not here for any thing  that is a disgrace'
on 11 november 1839, john king (aged seventeen) and william tunmore (eighteen), 
were picked up in a hayloft and, deemed by the magistrate to be rogues and vaga bonds intent on stealing, were sentenced summarily to three months hard labour in 
the house of correction at great yarmouth.10 three weeks later, sarah martin recalled 
`part of a conversation with john king', beginning with his protestation at conviction:

"i am not here for any thing that is a disgrace.["] what? not a disgrace to be 
committed to a prison? -- but i was only in a hay loft - and what for - that 
hay loft has of late been a thief's house. who but thieves go there? - i was 
only lying there. what right had you to enter another man's hay loft? would 
an honest man have done it. - i did nothing. - what good would it do you 
if you could possibly deceive me? - even then would not god know what 
you are? and would you not know yourself to be what you are? he looked 
disconcerted and agreed to this - he was in the prison before.11

 10   great yarmouth gaol registers, december 1838-december 1850, norfolk record office, y/l2 9, 

11 november 1839. nro holds the gaol's surviving papers. the gaol register (hereafter gr) included 
those admitted to the house of correction, under the same roof as the gaol. 
 11   sarah martin, everyday book, 3 december 1839. all quotations follow martin's punctuation and 

spelling. great yarmouth museum holds martin's surviving everyday books, headed: `prison school 
journal' (1836-1838); `sarah martin's memo book, remarks made after departure of prisoners',   
(7 november 1839-6 april 1840; this everyday book includes martin's prisoner registers, november 
1839-june 1842); `copy books written by prisoners under tuition of sarah martin', (12 april 1840-  
12 august 1840 and 10 april 1841-11 june 1841). extracts are included in martin's posthumous 
memoir, first published 1844. a fuller memoir, probably published in 1847, is available via google 
books; sarah martin, the prison visitor of great yarmouth, with extracts from her writings and prison 
journals (london: religious tract society, n.d.)

 7 
martin's surviving everyday books detailing lessons with inmates offer a rare oppor tunity to examine reactions to conviction, imprisonment and correction after 1835, 
when prisons were brought under the auspices of the prison inspectorate, charged 
with systematizing penal discipline in england and wales. 12 following lessons, mar tin hastily jotted down interactions and exchanges between prisoners and herself 
that she believed illustrated improvement or deterioration in conduct and charac ter. sometimes, as in her entry on john king, the teacher transcribed their words, 
albeit in abbreviated form. thus, at the very moment that the prison inspectorate 
was implementing policies designed to prevent communication between prisoners 
and subject them to a regime of silence, martin's journals captured snatches of their 
voices. how might we interpret this evidence and what, if anything, might it tell us 
about the experience and mentality of the convicted?

the copious writings of prison reformers and the wealth of data amassed by the 
authorities on the convicted have been read as constituting the discursive power of 
disciplinary regimes. much attention has been paid to how the idea of the `offender' 
was constructed by penal discourses and how, from the 1840s, biographical data 
on prisoners was used to profile and police individual offenders and criminal types. 
nevertheless, most scholars have been sceptical about whether these discourses tell 
us much about the individual subjectivities of the convicted, concluding that official 
records document what the powerful saw or understood, reflecting and reinforcing 
their preoccupations and prejudices. viewed this way, it is not john king who speaks 
to us through martin's journal but the teacher or, as post-structuralists would have 
it, the discourse of moral correction.13 

 12   u. r. q. henriques, `the rise and decline of the separate system of prison discipline', past and present (1972), 54:1, pp. 61-93; sea'n mcconville, a history of english prison administration. volume 1. 
1750-1877 (london: routledge & kegan paul, 1981); randall mcgowen, `the well-ordered prison: 
england, 1780-1865', the oxford history of the prison: the practice of punishment in western society, 
ed. by norval morris and david j. rothman (oxford: oxford university press, 1995), pp. 71-99; 
miles ogborn, `discipline, government and law: separate confinement in the prisons of england 
and wales, 1830-1877', transactions of the institute of british geographers, new series, 1:3 (1995), 
pp. 295-311.
 13   see, for instance, marie-christine leps,  apprehending the criminal: the production of deviance in 

nineteenth-century discourse (durham: duke university press, 1992); randall mcgowen, `power and 

8
in the following discussion i highlight two problems with this approach. first, 
it overplays the rigour of the information procedures deployed by governing bodies, 
institutions and agents like martin, and their confidence in the data they collected 
and what it could tell them. second, in focusing attention on inmates as objects of 
regulatory knowledge, we reaffirm the power of the institution and can miss the 
possibility of investigating the lived experience of those who came in contact with 
it. we cannot begin to comprehend the operation and effects of penal discourses on 
prisoners if we do not also try to go beyond them, to explore the lives and worlds of 
the convicted, and to detect what the record keepers did not, or could not, see.

martin's note on her encounter with king, for example, might seem to confirm 
her authority as teacher and spiritual guide and the legitimacy of the legal system 
that prosecuted him. it does not reveal the circumstances that prompted his defi ant protestation - `i am not here for any thing that is a disgrace' - but recounts 
the teacher's apparent success in bringing about his submission; `he looked dis concerted and agreed to this'. while martin's entries in the coming weeks recorded 
her answers to complaints by his cellmates over the justice of their confinement 
and their opposition to biblical instruction, king appears to have knuckled down to 
learning and within a fortnight could read words of three letters.14 nevertheless, she 
doubted his improvement in character; after all, as she remarked tersely, `he was in 
the prison before.'

far from martin's journals demonstrating the discursive power of the prison 
or the moral regime she managed within it, her need to document the reactions 
of scholars betrays awareness of her limited influence over them. unlike god, who, 
she believed, could see into their souls, the teacher might be deceived. she must 
judge them by their actions as well as words. their conduct, too, was difficult to 
interpret. on discharge, king and his cellmates asked for copies of the scriptural 
verses they had learned so they might show them to their friends outside the gaol. 

humanity, or foucault among the historians', reassessing foucault: power, medicine and the body, ed. 
by colin jones and roy porter (london: routledge, 1994), pp. 91-112.
 14   everyday book 11-13, 16 december, 1839. 

 9 
the teacher gave each a book, covered in brown paper, containing two or three 
hand-written verses, but how confident could she be that their request indicated the 
beginnings of conversion rather than attempts to curry her favour?15 

thus, record-keeping was important to martin: when inmates left, the teacher 
tabulated in her register what she had discovered of them and `observed' their char acter so she could judge if they deserved further assistance and remember them if 
they returned to gaol. hence, she recorded john king's age and sentence, his religion 
(church of england), that he could neither read nor write, having `no capacity', but 
that he had now learned `by memory'; `see everyday book', she added, in case she 
needed future reference. martin was typically cautious in her assessment of the lad: 
`former character and habits low - temper good - always wears a silly smile. very 
ignorant - willing and desirous of being instructed and diligent but fails from want 
of capacity. capable of great deceit.'16 martin's ambivalence and uncertainty towards 
the prisoner reflected what she had learned about him but also what she thought she 
knew of the hundreds of inmates who had passed through her gaol classes. 

john king's words, transcribed and mediated by martin, do not give us direct 
access to what the prisoner felt and thought: under interrogation was he defen sive, compliant, cheeky, defiant? inmate voices were caught only momentarily in 
the teacher's journals and reach us distorted through her words. more often, she 
reported what she told prisoners and so, for us, they are seen - like john king's `silly 
smile' - but not heard. while close reading, the dominant method used in recent 
socio-cultural history, may illuminate sarah martin's motivation and perspective, it 
is of limited use in examining the self-perception of her scholars. but perhaps their 
actions can speak in place of their words, as martin herself intimated? or, if their 
actions do not speak for them, might they speak of their world? her prison scholars 
were all captured elsewhere - in the gaol registers, census returns, and parish records. 
occasionally, even their `voices' can be heard. what happens if we orchestrate these 
voices? can they get us any closer to comprehending john king's encounter with the 

 15   everyday book, 20 december 1839.
 16   everyday book, 16 and 20 december 1839; martin's register, 1839, no. 19.

10
law and the prison visitor, even to what made him smile? to begin, let us turn to one 
occasion when convicts were compelled to speak.

ii. forced migration, forced narration?
by the 1830s and 1840s, gaol and hulk records on individual offenders accompanied all 
convicts to the penal colonies but only in van diemen's land were arrivals interrogated 
systematically about their criminal history and former life. as late as 1827, governor 
arthur complained the colony received no documentation about convicts' offences, 
conduct in custody or prior associations. 17 consequently, he instigated requirements 
that surgeon-superintendents, charged with the instruction as well as the physical welfare of exiles aboard ship, provide on arrival in hobart a `hulk list' containing:

the name, the number, the age, the birth-place, the crime, the period of conviction, when and where the sentence, whether married or single, whether 
he can read or write, or whether he can only read, or whether he can do 
neither, where taught, his trade, the character he brought from the gaoler, 
the character from the hulk, the alleged qualifications, what he is able to do 
and then his behaviour on board the transport. 18

this information formed the basis of each convict's indent. it was presented to 
the muster master, responsible for their assignment, who boarded the ship with 

 17   p. r. eldershaw, public records of tasmania. section three. convict department (1965; hobart: archives 

office of tasmania, 2003), p. 6.
 18   governor arthur, 27 june 1837, report for the select committee on transportation (1837), p. 279ff, cited 

by eldershaw, ibid, p. 6. all the information gathering proposed by arthur was incorporated into the 
cross-examination procedure, except for the question `where taught'. the chaplain thomas hay forster 
spent a week cross-examining 500 convicts aboard the  anson when it sailed from plymouth in 1844, 
carrying henry coppin from yarmouth; see an account of a voyage in a convict ship, with notes of the 
first itinerating missionary in tasmania (london: the society for the propagation of the gospel, march, 
1847), http://anglicanhistory.org/aus/spg23.html. for the role of surgeon-chaplains on convict ships, 
see: charles bateson,  the convict ships, 1787-1868  (1959; glasgow: brown, son & ferguson, 1985); 
rosalind crone, `attempts to (re)shape common reading habits: bible reading on the nineteenthcentury convict ship,' a return to the common reader: print culture and the novel, 1850-1900, ed. by 
beth palmer and adelene buckland (farnham: 2011), pp. 103-20; katherine foxall,  health, medicine 
and the sea: australian voyages, c. 1815-1860 (manchester: manchester university press, 2012).

 11 
the principal superintendent of convicts to make a `minute examination' of each 
prisoner, with piles of paperwork to hand. for arthur, interrogation would fill the 
gaps in official documentation and impress on convicts the all-seeing power of 
`the system'. faced by an apparently knowledgeable investigator, such display of 
evidence and forensic inspection, the convict, concluded arthur, would be awed 
into truthfulness: 

the man perceives at once that the officer who is examining him does know 
something of his history; and not being quite conscious how much of it is 
known, he reveals, i should think, generally a very fair statement of his past 
life, apprehensive of being detected in stating what is untrue.'19 

reputedly, convicts were indeed overwhelmed by the panopticon gaze of the principle superintendent who, they said, could recall every prisoner by name and ship and 
`never forgets anything'.20

cognisant of its omissions and reliance on prisoner confession, arthur's recordkeeping system seems to bear out michel foucault's premise that modern forms of 
surveillance function as `a network of relations from top to bottom, but also to a 
certain extent from bottom to top and laterally'. 21 yet, the role of offenders in the 
production of criminal records has rarely been probed. by the time they arrived in 
van diemen's land, most convicts will have become accustomed to cross-exam ination as they made their way from bench to prison to hulk to ship. ten of the 
yarmouth convicts, including john king, had been incarcerated on at least one occasion precisely for failing `to give a proper account' of themselves when picked up as a 
`rogue and vagabond', acting suspiciously. others will have been quizzed about their 

 19   cited by eldershaw, public records of tasmania, p. 7.
 20   linus miller, notes of an exile to van diemen's land  (1846; new york: johnson imprints, 1962), pp. 

285-6, cited by cassandra pybus, `the d--yankee quill-driver', in  chain letters , p. 21. for miller's 
description of his interrogation aboard the hulk and convict ship in his highly politicized account of 
his transportation for taking part in the `patriot war' in upper canada, 1838-9, see ibid pp. 17-21.
 21   michel foucault, discipline and punish: the birth of the prison (1975, trans. alan sheridan) (harmondsworth: penguin, 1991), p. 176.

12
circumstances and rights of settlement when they applied to the poor law guardians 
for parish relief.22 some were at home in 1841 when the census enumerator required 
residents to provide their age, occupation and native place. 23 used to reeling off 
an account of themselves, what did convicts admit to the authorities and, equally 
important, what did they omit? was arthur right to assume they would be inclined 
to truthfulness? did any seize the opportunity to enhance their prospects in a new 
land by reconstructing their past?

there has been considerable debate over the value and interpretation of data based 
on information supplied by prisoners. according to v. a. c. gatrell and t. b. hadden, evidence of their offences, ages, literacy levels and occupations garnered by the prison and 
police returns `is probably the least reliable material in the official statistical records'.24 
in view of contemporary complaints that offenders lied about their age, employment, 
schooling and religion to mitigate their sentence or treatment in gaol, j. j. tobias 
speculated that prisoners were `incurable romancers'. 25 more credence has been given 
to the value of convict indents but they have been the source of radically different 
interpretations of australia's penal population. the first studies employing large-scale 
examination of indents to determine convicts' prior offending rates concluded in the 
mid-twentieth century that, contrary to popular mythology, exiles were rarely starv ing poachers or `village hambdens'. most convicts were not first-time offenders, they 
argued, and many came from what contemporaries termed the `criminal class'.26 

 22   carolyn steedman writes suggestively about settlement examinations as exercises in `enforced nar ration' by the labouring poor, and their productive role in developing ideas of (auto)biography and 
`character'. significantly, settlement cases were adjudicated by magistrates; see steedman, `the magistrates', dust (manchester: manchester university press, 2001), pp. 38-65. 
 23   edward higgs, making sense of the census revisited: census records for england and wales 1801-1901. 

a handbook for historical researchers (london: institute of historical research, 2005); paul dobraszczyk, `"give in your account": using and abusing victorian census forms', journal of victorian culture 
14.1 (2009), 1-25.
 24   v. a. c. gatrell and t. b. hadden, `criminal statistics and their interpretation', in  nineteenth-century 

society: essays in the use of quantitative methods for the study of social data  (cambridge: cambridge 
university press, 1972), pp. 336-396 (p. 379).
 25   j. j. tobias,  crime and industrial society in the nineteenth century  (oxford: b.t. batsford, 1967), 

pp. 14-21 (p. 19).
 26   l. l. robson, the convict settlers of australia: an enquiry into the origin and character of the convicts 

 13 

challenging this iconoclastic revisionism, data analysis by economic historians in 
the 1980s barely looked at prior convictions and instead honed in on information relating to convicts' occupations, skills and labour power.27 the exiles, they contended, were 
best seen as `forced migrants' and `convict workers' whose profile correlated closely 
with that of the british labouring classes from whose ranks they were mainly drawn 
rather than from an imagined criminal residuum. in the most recent study to estimate 
prior offending rates, alison alexander, project manager for `founders and survivors', 
endorses the argument made by the convict workers team that the majority of van 
diemen's land convicts had been `ordinary working-class people' in that about 75% 
had been in employment but supplemented meagre earnings by resorting to petty 
theft. around a quarter, nevertheless, had been habitual offenders, she estimates, with 
about 15% having regularly engaged in theft alongside casual labour while perhaps 
10% had been professional thieves. alexander's assessment is based on information 
listed in the indents of 5048 men and women, supplied by the authorities and by convicts themselves but is not, unlike the analysis below, correlated with gaol admissions.28 

recently, attention has turned not just to the imaginary of nineteenth-century 
observers but to cultural narratives deployed by the convicted in their keepsakes and 
tattoos, stories and memoirs.29 far from dismissing offenders as `incurable romancers',  

transported to new south wales and van diemen's land 1787-1852  (melbourne: melbourne university press, 1965); a. g. l. shaw,  convicts and the colonies: a study of penal transportation from great 
britain and ireland to australia and other parts of the british empire  (1966; irish historical press, 
1998).
 27   stephen nicholas, (ed.), convict workers: reinterpreting australia's past  (cambridge: cambridge university press, 1988).
 28   alison alexander,  tasmania's convicts: how felons built a free society  (crows nest, nsw: allen & 

unwin, 2010, enlarged edition), p. 30.
 29   david kent and norma townshend (eds) joseph mason: assigned convict, 1831-1837 (carlton south, 

vic.: melbourne university press, 1996); ian duffield and james bradley (eds.),  representing convicts: 
new perspectives on forced convict labour migration (leicester: leicester university press, 1997); paul 
donnelly, `"when this you see remember me": convict love tokens and related keepsakes', australasian victorian studies journal 3.1 (1997): 22-37; michele field and timothy millett (eds.), convict love 
tokens: the leaden hearts the convicts left behind  (south australia: wakefield press, 1998); hamish 
maxwell-stewart and ian duffield, `skin deep devotions: religious tattoos and convict transporta tion to australia' in  written on the body: the tattoo in european and american history , ed. by jane 
caplan (london: reaktion books, 2000), pp. 118-35; lucy frost and hamish maxwell-stewart (eds.), 

14
historians have begun to show how romancing itself might constitute a form of evi dence which illuminates the cultural strategies prisoners used to convey, interpret 
and trade on their past.30 ian duffield, for example, has viewed the records of convict 
interrogation on arrival in van diemen's land as `forced narratives' that, nonethe less, contain arresting first-person voices. in a close reading of statements made by 
four black convicts, he argues their answers to cross-examination should be read as 
`high-density micro-narrative[s]' in which the voice of the colonized subject intrudes 
spectacularly into the state record. alexander simpson, court martialled in 1832 for 
his part in the jamaican slave uprising, declared his offence as `mutiny & exciting 
the slaves to rebellion. i was a slave myself.' such `powerfully dramatic "action narratives"', contends duffield, wrest our attention from the colonial `eye', with its power 
of surveillance over the prisoner, to the autobiographical `i' of the convicted. they 
remind us that the penal gaze was not omnipotent for its record-keeping depended 
on convicts' own voices that sometimes challenged the system that imprisoned them. 
`[i]n these brief, supercharged tales', concludes duffield, `the convicts' agendas are 
not effectively hijacked by the agendas of the convict department record-keeping: 
convict voices are vividly if briefly audible.'31

the convict `i', however, was rarely documented as assertively as alexander 
simpson's defiant declaration, `i was a slave myself'. usually the first-person pronoun 
was expunged from the record and the convict's identity reduced to his crimes and utility to the colonial labour force, as when the clerk entered john king as `fisherman' and 
noted his stated offence, `stealing 2 stone 11 of old canvass pr [prosecutor] cullenthorpe 
of yarmouth'.32 in order to recover king's statement as an `action narrative', and those 

chain letters: narrating convict lives  (melbourne: melbourne university press, 2001); rogers, `the 
way to jerusalem'. 
 30   compare, for example, smith's sceptical interrogation of the claims made by a returned convict with 

beier's cultural analysis of the man's story-telling patter: f. b. smith, `mayhew's convict', victorian studies, 
22 (summer 1979): 431-48; and a. l. beier, `identity, language, and resistance in the making of the victorian "criminal class": mayhew's convict revisited', journal of british studies, 44 (july 2005): 499-515.
 31   ian duffield, `"stated this offence": high density convict micro-narratives', chain letters, pp. 119-35: 

pp. 120, 122, 134-5.
 32   most of the van diemen's land records are held at the state archives of tasmania, hobart, and many 

are searchable online at  http://portal.archives.tas.gov.au/menu.aspx?search=11. these include the 

 15 
of the vast majority interrogated by the superintendent of convicts, we need to return 
to the scenes of their `crimes' and the circumstances that led to their exile. 

\gamma \gamma \gamma \delta  \theta \lambda \xi \pi \sigma \upsilon  \phi \psi \omega fffifl\lambda  fi\omega \upsilon  ffi\pi \xi \psi fiffl i\sigma \pi jffl\psi \omega fl` 'ffi^fi^\lambda \upsilon   

^*\psi _ *,\lambda \omega \xi \lambda ss

in the following examination, i compare the prison and convict records of thirty-four 
men transported to van diemen's land in the period 1837-1852 who served time 
at yarmouth gaol, for summary and indictable offences. 33 small-scale analysis has 
its own challenges and limitations. piecing together the offending histories of the 
convicted requires careful detective work if we are to avoid falsely indicting them 
anew. two john kings went in and out of yarmouth gaol in the early 1840s, for 
example, and another man bearing the same name was transported with john king 
aboard the surrey. variations in name and transcription mistakes can lead to a wide 
margin of error so my statistical findings should be read as approximations. how ever, a micro-historical approach combining quantitative and qualitative investiga tion and aided by access databases, enables more extensive contextualization and 
intensive interpretation of historical sources than large-scale studies can undertake. 
some yarmouth convicts had entered prison as early as 1834 and all can be tracked 
in the gaoler's daily log as well as in the gaol registers. twenty-nine convicts were 
transported following trial at the great yarmouth quarter sessions. the remaining 
five passed through the prison but were sentenced in the county town to transportation at the norwich quarter sessions or the norfolk special assizes.34 

major records on individual convicts  - the conduct records and convict indents - including those on 
john king: john king, 6533, per surrey (4), 1842, extra identifier 2, [database no. 40331], con33/1/27,  
con14/1/13. where both records are available, they are given in the order of conduct record fol lowed by convict indent. for some convicts there is no indent but details about their occupation and 
physical characteristics etc. are found in the appropriation lists or description lists. these will follow 
the hyperlink to the conduct record. convicts' names are followed by their police number, ship, and 
year of arrival. for using convict records see susan hood, transcribing tasmanian convict records (port 
arthur: port arthur historic site management authority, 2003). detailed, though partial, transcrip tions can be searched at http://foundersandsurvivors.org/. 
 33   only two were sentenced to transportation after 1845 and by 1852 most had reached, or were reaching, the end of their sentence.
 34   the online database aeoeo/aeoeoeo/  !oeae"#$ %&'('oeoeae )"o/'#*"&#$ +,-+.+/-0 (provo, ut, usa: ancestry.com 

operations inc, 2009) was searched for evidence of convictions outside yarmouth. these registers 

16
five women admitted to yarmouth gaol in the same period were sent to van 
diemen's land, four of whom were sentenced by the town's magistrates. tried at the 
norfolk county assizes, which heard all capital offences, charlotte yaxley pleaded 
not guilty to murdering her step-daughter. she was the only yarmouth convict to 
protest against her conviction when stating her offence in van diemen's land: `i am 
innocent'.35 all the other exiles were convicted of theft and their profiles correspond 
with the similar number sent from the east anglian port to other penal colonies in 
the same years. i exclude women from this analysis, however, because their offend ing histories were very different to the men's. between them, the women had been 
convicted of seven offences (only two had known prior convictions) and, in common 
with other female prisoners in the gaol, they had a much lower committal rate than 
the males. 

all but two of the male yarmouth exiles arrived in van diemen's land after 
the transition in 1839 from the assignment to the probation system, when penal 
bureaucracy approached its apogee. 36 comparison of gaol registers and convict 
records confirms governor arthur's concerns about the reliability and leakage of 
the official documentation trail that continued into the probation era.37 in 1844, for 
example, the gaoler testified at the norwich assizes to the prior convictions of three 
former inmates, all under twenty years old, tried for stealing money from a public 
house: robert harrod had eleven committals at yarmouth, william jenkins three and 
joshua artis nine. yet, the gaoler's information did not reach the hulk authority,   

recorded only indictments and miss any summary convictions convicts had received elsewhere. 
 35   charlotte yaxley, 17, per  garland grove  (1), 1841, conduct record  con40/1/10, description list 

con19/1/3. for cross-examination of women at hobart, see lucy frost,  abandoned women: scottish 
convicts exiled beyond the seas (london: allen & unwin, 2012), pp. 26-9. only 11% of women aboard 
the australasia in 1849 had been charged with more than two previous offences while over a half had 
only one or no prior convictions; see trudy mae cowley,  a drift of `derwent ducks': lives of the 200 
female irish convicts transported on the australasia from dublin to hobart in 1849 (hobart: research 
tasmania, 2005), pp. 11-12.
 36   ian brand, the convict probation system: van diemen's land 1839-1854 (hobart: blubber head press, 

1990).
 37   errors will have been inevitable in a bureaucratic exercise on such a scale. sentenced at walsingham, 

william hurn per neptune 1, 1837 and william barnes per asia 5, 1840 were wrongly entered as tried 
at great yarmouth; see \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \delta \pi  \sigma  \upsilon \xi \lambda \phi \psi  \omega fffiflfi\delta \xi \lambda  ffi\phi \theta fi\psi ffl\phi ff\psi , 7 july 1837 and 10 january 1840.

 17 
which reported that harrod and artis had one previous conviction and jenkins 
`2 or 3', presumably offences committed at norwich.38 neither did the gaoler's report 
of their conduct under his watch reach the convict authority. harrod was disciplined 
seven times in yarmouth gaol while jenkins and artis, at eighteen times apiece, were 
among the most frequently punished inmates for run-of-the-mill infractions: fight ing, singing, shouting, swearing, communicating with female prisoners and so on. 39 
when the gaoler's report was forwarded, it usually tallied with his record of the 
prisoner's conduct in gaol, but in only nineteen out of thirty-four cases did his assessment reach van diemen's land.

the gaol report usually recorded the gaoler's numerical estimate of the con victs' prior committals at yarmouth, regardless of whether they had been acquitted, 
and included the offence for which they were transported. according to his reports, 
the nineteen convicts had served 56 imprisonments between them, giving an average offending rate of 2.95. in fact, the thirty-four convicts had served 129 prior 
imprisonments at yarmouth, averaging 3.82 each. if we add to these committals 
the offences that led to their transportation, as well as a further 29 offences com mitted elsewhere, only two of which they omitted, we have a total of 194 offences 
and an overall committal rate of 5.71 each. by contrast, if we calculated the average 
number of prior committals solely on the gaoler's reports, we would have a figure 
of 1.65 per convict, an under-reporting of repeat offending by around two-thirds.

only three of the thirty-four convicts were positively identified by the gaoler 
as first-time offenders but, in their statements, two of these acknowledged prior 
offences committed elsewhere while the third had been imprisoned twice at 
yarmouth as a refractory pauper. 40 no information was sent about seven con  38   gaol keeper's journal, january 1841-december 1845 (y/l2 48), 20 december 1844; robert harrod, 

15914, per  theresa, 1845,  con33/1/67, con14/1/29; joshua artis, 15826, ditto, william jenkins, 
15933, ditto. 
 39   gaol keeper's journals, january 1836-december 1840 (y/l2, 47) and january 1841-december 1845 

(y/l2 48), passim.
 40   john cooper, 14708, per  william jardine  (1), 1844,  con33/1/62,  con14/1/30; edmund bowles, 

13829, per barossa (2), 1844, con33/1/59, con14/1/8; william alexander, 18277, per mayda, 1846, 
con33/1/79, con17/1/2, p. 154, off norfolk island per pestongee bomangee may 1847.

18
victs. six of these men had previous committals at yarmouth while four of them 
owned up to former convictions in their statements. the one convict who had no 
offending history was a sheffield cutler on the tramp, sentenced to transportation 
for street robbery committed in yarmouth with two other itinerants. 41 if, as many 
itinerants will have done, he concealed his identity and previous convictions from 
the authorities (he claimed to have no relatives) he has also concealed himself 
from the historian and his record cannot be confirmed. 

with at most one first-time male offender transported from yarmouth, the 
gaol committal rates raise questions about the conclusions of earlier large-scale 
examinations of convict records, such as the assertion in convict workers that twothirds of exiles were first-time offenders. 42 they also suggest the possibility that l. 
l. robson's long-contested claim that `[c]ertainly one-half, and probably two-thirds, 
had formerly been punished' may have been a conservative estimate. 43 however, 
committal rates do not take us much closer to understanding how the convicted 
viewed their offences. some imprisonments were for very short periods - a day 
or two on further examination or a week or two on remand that did not lead to 
conviction and which, understandably, many convicts did not acknowledge. if we 
exclude these short stays and six acquittals from our analysis, we have a figure of 
91 convictions of which the convicts admitted 45 and omitted 46 when stating 
their former crimes.44 with the offences committed outside yarmouth and those for 
which they were sentenced to transportation, in all they acknowledged 122 crimes, 
averaging 3.59 offences each. 

 41   john morgan, 15291, per  george seymour, 1845, con33/1/64, p. 15291,  con14/1/26, description 

list, con18/1/44. 
 42   based on indents for new south wales 1817-1840, nicholas and shergold, found a recidivist rate of 

39%; see stephen nicholas and peter r. shergold, `unshackling the past' in convict workers: reinter preting australia's past, ed. stephen nicholas (cambridge: cambridge university press, 1988), pp. 3-13 
(p. 7). using a sample of 4000 indents, shaw found 45% of convicts sent to van diemen's land (1830-
1840) had prior convictions; see nicholas and shergold, `convicts as migrants, ibid, pp. 43-61 (p. 46).
 43   robson's calculation was based on a 5% sampling of male convict records for van deimen's land and 

new south wales; see convict settlers, pp. 9, 36-7, 176-9. 
 44   this figure includes very short imprisonments and acquittals for offences that convicts acknowledged. 

like the gaoler, some convicts may have reported their committals rather than convictions.

 19 

of the prior offences they admitted, the yarmouth exiles were most likely to 
acknowledge convictions for theft. they admitted to 33 (73.33%) of these offences, 
even some that were trivial (samuel iverson, who seems to have had a sweet tooth, 
confessed to serving one day for peppermint and two acquittals for sugar) and to us 
earned grossly excessive sentences (george mills's six-month sentence for stealing 
apples).45 in total, the transportees declared six out of eight convictions for pilfering 
food and all five for stealing clothes. their readiness to admit to theft suggests that 
most accepted the illegality of crimes against property ownership, an acceptance 
borne out by the fact that, when free, some would take to court those who stole from 
them, as did considerable numbers of former convicts. robert harrod arrived in van 
diemen's land with a string of thirteen convictions going back to the age of twelve 
of which over half involved theft (though he conceded only one), but he would bring 
at least two prosecutions when manager of a hotel and store.46 

much of the thieving by yarmouth offenders appears to have been opportun istic and connected with their occupation, like the work-based appropriation that 
characterized much of the crime committed by the labouring poor elsewhere. 47 
samuel wells worked for a brewer and was transported for stealing a peck of barley. 
seven years previously he had served three months for robbing a plank, an offence 
he declared along with stealing a fender, a charge for which he was acquitted. 48 the 
sawyer isaac gowing was transported for stealing a plane; he admitted his one prior 
conviction of thieving wood the previous year.49 the yarmouth transportees declared 
six of the eight clearly occupation-related thefts of which formerly they had been 
convicted. partnerships in crime were also connected to occupation. two young men 
transported for life for horse-thieving may have met through working as boatmen, 

 45   samuel iverson, 16449, per  marion (2), 1845,  con33/1/70, con14/1/31; george mills, 8782, per 

duchess of northumberland, 1843, con33/1/36, con14/1/19. 
 46   mercury (hobart), 12 july 1861, p. 2 and 8 december 1865, p. 2; trove national library of australia, 

historical newspapers, http://trove.nla.gov.au/ 
 47   for work-based appropriation, see barry s. godfrey, david j. cox, and stephen d. farrall,  criminal 

lives: family life, employment and offending (oxford: oxford university press, 2007), 78-105, 172-3.
 48   samuel wells, 8882, per duchess of northumberland (1), con33/1/36, con14/1/19.

 49   isaac gowing, 8005, per triton, 1842, con33/1/33, con14/1/15. 

20
though when they were first committed together for being idle and disorderly, the 
youngest was only thirteen. he admitted that offence (10 days and 2 months) and 
twelve months for housebreaking but the older boy admitted only one prior conviction of twelve months for stealing a watch.50 

others were more selective in their recall. thomas mapes was committed nine 
times at yarmouth. he pleaded not guilty to stealing three cheeses with a compan ion, a cheesemonger, but was sentenced to six months. in his statement he admitted 
taking cheese and receiving ten days for an assault. in fact, by paying fines he avoided 
imprisonments for two assaults, one against a policeman, but served one month 
for an assault on another constable. he overlooked these and other committals, 
including two months for vagrancy and suspicion of robbery. 51 by contrast, william 
chapman admitted six imprisonments for `disorderly conduct', without specifying he 
had been charged three times with beating policemen, nor for bathing in the river at 
an improper time. an apprentice shoemaker, he admitted stealing ladies' shoes with 
two other boys, one of whom acknowledged the same offence in his statement.52

the yarmouth convicts were less ready, therefore, to acknowledge violent crime 
than property offences. in general, assaults were prosecuted much less frequently 
and severely than property-based offences and often imprisonment could be avoided 
by paying a fine. six men had convictions relating to assault (five of these on women, 
five on policemen) but only three owned up to any history of violence. james brown 
alluded in veiled terms to two such commitments: `two months for a row' (with his 
father) and six months for `breach of peace' (an assault on elizabeth barber). 53 both 
offences must have been vicious to incur such long sentences. for other convicts, 

 50   lewis goodwin, 1264, per  blenheim (1), 1837,  con31/1/3, appropriation list,  con27/1/7; john 

bowles, 2635, ditto.
 51   gr, 13 march 1837; 30 march 1837; 19 april 1837; 29 september 1840, 9 august 1841; 13 august 

1842; 9 august 1843; 29 november 1844; 27 october 1845; thomas mapes, 18874, per  palmyra, 
1846, con33/1/81, con14/1/36.
 52   gr, 24 april 1838; 7 november 1838; 29 april 1839; 10 august 1840; 4 january 1841; 15 novem ber 1842; 3 february 1843; william chapman, 20472, per  mount stewart elphinstone  (2), 1848, 
con33/1/89, con14//38; james barley, 673, per  hindostan (2), 1841,  con33/1/4, appropriation 
list, con27/1/8.
 53   gr, 6 august 1836; 27 october 1836; james brown, 5709, per  susan (2), 1842,  con33/1/24, 

con14/1/15.

 21 
omission of their history of assault probably reflects their acceptance of violence as an 
integral and everyday part of the rough-and-ready male culture of the seaport rather 
than any reluctance to declare it or sense of wrong-doing and shame.54 sentenced to 
seven years for stealing a silk bag and money, for instance, john newstead acknowl edged twelve months for a highway robbery committed outside yarmouth and five 
counts of `drunkenness', probably connected with his four convictions for assault at 
yarmouth, one on a policeman and three on women, one of whom was probably his 
girlfriend since her name was tattooed on his arm. neither did newstead disclose 
committals for stealing a pair of boots and being a refractory pauper.55 

of the men's 129 commitments at yarmouth, only 19 (14.73%) led to an appearance at the quarter session; the remaining 111 cases (86.05%) were heard summarily 
by the magistrates.56 many of these were for misdemeanours ranging from vagrancy, 
being idle and disorderly or a suspicious character, to removing soil, sand or dirt 
without license. william copping confessed to breaking out of the workhouse five 
times, though none of the three convicts who served time at yarmouth as refrac tory paupers owned up to their offence against the parish.57 thomas tripp admitted 
two counts of suspicion but not the three weeks spent for being a rogue and vaga bond who `did wilfully expose his person, he being entirely naked'. 58 however, 42 
of the yarmouth men's former convictions were for misdemeanours to which they 
admitted 25, a surprisingly high number (59.52%). these included the boys william 
jenkins, sent down for twelve months for `setting boats adrift', and thomas bowles, a 
week each for breaking windows and being absent from his work.59

 54   martin j. wiener,  men of blood: violence, manliness and criminal justice in victorian england  (cambridge: cambridge university press, 2004); clive emsley,  hard men: violence in england since 1750  
(london: hambledon, 2005).
 55   gr, 13 may 1842; 21 may 1842; 1 september 1842; 19 november 1842; 24 april 1843; 3 january 

1846; 30 june 1846; john newstead, 21025, per ratcliffe (2), 1848, con33/1/91, con14/1/40.
 56   on the rise of summary jurisdiction, see peter king,  crime, justice and discretion in england, 1740-

1820 (oxford: oxford university press, 2000), 82-125. 
 57   william copping, 3589, per barossa (1), 1842, con33/1/16, con14/1/12.

 58   gr, 9 january 1839; 6 february 1839; 5 march 1842; 18 may 1842; thomas tripp, 12997, per  lady 

franklin, 1844, con33/1/55, p. 12997, con17/1/1, p. 16.
 59   william jenkins, 15933, per theresa, con33/1/67, con14/1/29; thomas bowles, 10001, per asiatic, 

1843, con33/1/42, con14/1/24.

22
the scavenger christopher riches, however, clearly distinguished between felony 
and misdemeanour; `denies having been convicted before' states his convict record. 
he was eighteen when sentenced to transportation in 1845 with his brother isaac 
(seventeen) for stealing four fathoms of rope from a ship, worth 1s 10d. 60 on their 
conviction, the gaoler, unusually, wrote out their committal history in full, showing 
he was well aware of their record of persistent offending. yet, though christopher had 
been committed eleven times and isaac six, their gaol reports list only two convic tions each.61 while comparison of these records illustrates the gaps in the paper trail, 
it also illuminates the boys' understanding of legality, property and theft. christopher 
first entered gaol on remand in june 1841 for `digging up and carrying away soil from 
the denes' and was remanded twice more that year for stealing manure and a basket. 
on other occasions he received a week or a fortnight for removing dirt and ill-using 
a donkey. many juvenile boys were summarily convicted of gathering dirt - a com mon means of making a little money. for christopher, however, it was a legitimate 
livelihood - sarah martin noted his father was the `town scavenger' - at which he 
worked industriously. ten of his eleven admissions were connected with scavenging. 
his brother isaac seems to have drawn the same distinction between thieving and 
scavenging. he admitted six months for stealing a watch, seven days for stealing 
money, and seven days for `picking my mothers [sic] pocket' but omitted six months 
for vagrancy with intent to steal wood from a shipyard. isaac excluded one further 
imprisonment - stealing eggs and knives from a shop - an offence for which both 
brothers were prosecuted but only the younger convicted. given isaac's admission of 
the other thefts, on this occasion he may have been wrongly indicted. 

isaac's remand for picking his mother's pocket alerts us to another aspect of 
the offenders' history that is thrown into relief when we compare the statements 
convicts made about their family and its whereabouts with other records. at least 
five yarmouth convicts had been committed to gaol by a relative, six if we include 

 60   christopher riches, 17981, per  joseph somes  (1), 1846,  con33/1/77,  con14/1/35; isaac riches, 

17982, ditto.
 61   gaol index and receiving book, y/d 41/28, 12 september 1845.

 23 
william copping, whose prosecution was instigated by the man who subsequently 
lived with copping's wife. james brown was first committed, aged eighteen, for a 
`row' at the behest of his father. the short, sharp shock of six weeks confinement 
evidently failed for he received three more committals before being sentenced to 
seven years. 62 likewise, on the complaint of his mother, twelve-year-old robert 
harrod spent the first of eleven stints at yarmouth gaol for being `idle and disor derly, wandering abroad and absenting himself from home'. 63 his absences may 
have been prompted by tension with his step-father, who robert omitted from 
the family he listed to the convict authorities. 64 thomas bowles was sentenced to 
transportation for stealing #50 from his uncle. 65 his father edmund had been a 
policeman at yarmouth and was charged with secreting a watch, property of the 
executors of thos bowles. when young thomas got into trouble with the law, 
edmund appears to have been absent from home; he was not resident at the 1841 
census and in 1844, two years after his son, was transported for street robbery in 
norwich, committed with a woman who was not his wife, and where he had also 
been convicted of assault.66 

while these committals hint at family trouble - relatives are only likely to have 
prosecuted an errant family member after prolonged disruptive behaviour - all five 
gave an accurate account of their kin, as did the large majority of convicts. other 
evidence on their convict records suggests a kind of atonement on the part of two 
of these men. isaac riches's elaborate tattoos, noted by the convict clerk, depicted 
the parents from whom he had stolen - `mr [mary riches] cr [christopher riches] 
man & woman above elbow' - and probably his companionship with his brother 

 62   gaol committal and discharge book, 6 august 1836.
 63   gaol committal and discharge book, 26 september 1837; sarah martin's register, 1841, no. 53.
 64   1841 census, ho 107/793/1, 1841 england census [database on-line] (provo, ut, usa: ancestry.com); 

robert harrod, 15914, per theresa, 1845, con33/1/67, con14/1/29.
 65   thomas bowles, 10001, per asiatic, 1843, con33/1/42, con14/1/24.

 66   gr, 13 may 1842; edmund bowles, 13829, per  barossa  (2), 1844,  con33/1/59,  con14/1/8; ho 

107/790.2. thanks to descendants of thomas and edmund bowles whose research led me to 
edmund's transportation;  http://www.rootschat.com/forum/index.php?phpsessid=ej0pkl1bn9ho
3tlpmgfjaab807&topic=526988.

24
with whom he embarked for van diemen's land - `two men arm in arm'.67 when first 
admitted to gaol, james brown was entered in the register as `james brown, junior' to 
distinguish him from the father with whom he had been brawling. brown appears to 
have adopted the patronym for he is named in the convict records as `james brown, 
the younger'. he seems to have identified with his father, following in his occupation 
as a bricklayer and proudly displaying the tools of their trade in his tattoos - 
`hammer compasses trowell plumb rule level step level'.68

most yarmouth convicts began their offending career in their early teens. 61.02% 
were under eighteen when they committed their pre-transportation offences; as a 
cohort they were younger than the gaol's repeat offender population, 41% of whom 
were under eighteen in the years 1839-1841. of the convicts, 32.35 % were still 
under eighteen when sentenced to transportation. where robson found half of male 
transportees were under twenty-five on arrival in australia, nearly three-quarters 
(70.59%) of the yarmouth convicts fell into this age group.69 only five were over 30. 
at fourteen, henry coppin was the youngest exile, sentenced in 1841 for stealing an 
oil frock and trousers from a ship. one year earlier, his father william copping had 
been given seven years for receiving stolen goods. five times confined as a refractory 
pauper, william seems not to have been able to fulfil the two main paternal duties 
of providing for and protecting his children and it is likely that, with his departure, 
henry went off the rails. 70 probably henry was estranged from his mother, for her 
name is not included in his statement though he gave the names of his father and 
siblings. at the 1841 census, henry was not at the lodging house in lowestoft where 
his mother resided with the man who had testified against her husband, and he was 
picked up as a rogue and vagabond prior to his conviction for theft.71

 67   isaac riches, 17982 per  joseph somes  (1), 1846,  con33/1/77,  con14/1/35; 1841 census, ho 

107/793/8.
 68   committal and discharge book, 6 aug. 1836; james brown the younger, 5709,  susan, 1842, 

con33/1/24, con14/1/15; 1841 census, ho 107/793/7. 
 69   robson, convict settlers, p. 182.

 70   trev broughton and helen rogers, (eds.)  \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \delta \xi  \pi \theta \lambda  \sigma \pi \upsilon \phi \delta \xi \phi \psi \psi \lambda  \omega \theta  \upsilon \phi \delta  ff\omega \theta \delta \upsilon \delta \delta \theta \upsilon \phi  fi\delta \theta \upsilon fl\xi ffi (basingstoke: palgrave, 2006).
 71   henry coppin, 11429, per  anson, 1844,  con33/1/49,  con14/1/25; william copping, 3589, per 

barossa (1), 1842, con33/1/16, con14/1/12. gr, 21 october 1841; 1841 census, ho 107/1030/7. 

 25 

reconstructing convicts' families by linking their indents with christening 
records and census returns reveals a startling aspect of their profile. of the thirtyone men whose families can be identified through the indent or the census, sev enteen (54.84%) had lost their father, eighteen if we include the effective death of 
henry coppin's father on his transportation. twelve had no mother (38.71%) while 
six had neither parent, though only one of these was under twenty. only ten con victs (32.26%) had both parents living. 72 record linkage reveals the catastrophic 
effects on some young men of the loss of a parent, and especially the father. in a port 
dominated by male occupations with few employment opportunities for women, the 
death of the male breadwinner could devastate the family economy. on at least two 
occasions william hickling's mother had taken her three sons into the workhouse 
and towards the end of her life she would again be a pauper. when william was 
sentenced to transportation for theft in 1841, maria hickling and her youngest son 
robert (seven) were acquitted of receiving stolen goods from him.73 

all but two convicts came from norfolk, one of the most distressed agrarian 
counties in the 1830s and 1840s, while four came from norwich. 74 the rest were 
born in great yarmouth or its immediate vicinity where the mixed economy of the 
port offered more employment opportunities, though much of it casual, and gen erally better wages than the surrounding rural areas. the gaoler's records of their 
occupations closely correlate with those on their convict statements and allow us 
to track their progress through the occupational structure of the port. on his first 
admission in 1839, aged fourteen, for stealing poultry, william hickling was work ing at `a fish office' while on successive visits he was listed as a labourer. on arrival 

 72   based on autobiographical recollections of working-class boyhood in the period 1800-78, jane 

humphries finds that by the age of 14, 16% had lost their father, 13% their mother, and 26% 
had survived both parents, rates similar to findings in other studies. while my findings focus on 
slightly older boys and young men, it appears likely that considerably higher rates of orphanage had 
occurred in this cohort than in the wider population. for the difficulties in measuring orphanage 
and the effects of parental mortality on children, see humphries, childhood and child labour in the 
british industrial revolution (cambridge: cambridge university press, 2010), pp. 61-72 (p. 65).
 73   3 december 1836 and 14 april 1838, index of examined paupers, 1756-1844 [y/l16/8]; gr, 

2 december 1841. few poor law records survive for great yarmouth so record linkage between 
prison and poor law registers has not been possible.
 74   anne digby, pauper palaces (london: routledge & kegan paul, 1978). 

26
in van diemen's land, however, william described himself as a fisherman, an occu pation that probably signified the future he had hoped for himself, rather than his 
previous employment. if this is the case, he connected himself with his elder brother 
matthew, listed as a mariner in the 1841 census, and the sailor father they had lost.75 
joshua artis firmly identified himself with his father, a knife-grinder and cutler. we 
can trace joshua's progress from `chip boy' in his early admissions to `labourer' in 
later ones. in van diemen's land he described himself as `an imperfect tailor', the 
trade he must have begun to learn at the penitentiary prior to embarkation, but to 
which he proudly added his father's trade - cutler - the one to which, presumably, 
he always thought he was heading.76 fifteen of the twenty-three convicts whose family occupations can be traced claimed their father's trade or that of an elder brother. 
some had definitely been employed in their father's trade, such as the waterman 
joseph anderson and watchmaker william wetherill. for others, their stated occupation was a way of connecting themselves to the life they had departed and, in particular, their sense of masculine vocation.77 

there is only one convict who may have deliberately changed his employment 
status in order to enhance his chances in the penal colony. henry simmonds entered 
yarmouth gaol as a `hawker of needles'; in van diemen's land he gave himself the 
more elevated role of coachman and groom. conceivably he had done this job in the 
past but his claim may have been a white lie for he appears to have told one other. 
simmonds had been arrested at yarmouth with his `wife' anna, who was acquitted of 
street robbery; in van diemen's land he declared himself single.78 william chapman, 
sentenced at the same sessions as simmonds, likewise claimed to be single though, 

 75   gr, 28 december 1839, 3 june 1840, 2 april 1841, 3 june 1841, 30 october 1841, 28 november 1841, 

28 december 1841. william hickling, 6511, per  surrey (4), 1842,  con33/1/27, con14/1/13; 1841 
census, ho 107/793/4.
 76   gr, 3 may 1839, 24 may 1839, 6 july 1841, 12 june 1841, 12 june 1842, 19 june 1842, 7 july 1842, 4 

october 1842, 7 september 1843, joshua artis, 15826, per theresa, 1845, con33/1/67, con14/1/29.
 77   joseph anderson, 20670, per  bangalore, 1848,  con33/1/90, con14/1/39; william wetherill, per 

tortoise, 1842, police no. 6511, con33/1/17, con14/1/13.
 78   gaol receiving book, 26 january 1843; henry simmonds, 15317, per  sir george seymour , 1845, 

con33/1/64, p. 15317, con14/1/26.

 27 
four days after his removal to the  warrior hulk, his `wife' had to be told to leave the 
gaol, having appeared `in a state of angry excitement, using disrespectful language 
towards the local authorities'.79 i have not found either simmonds or chapman (who 
may have been in common-law unions) in the marriage registers but if these two 
men cast off their marital status - as did some convicts and the spouses they left 
behind - i have found no other evidence of men falsifying their occupational or family circumstances. in the light of their collective profile, therefore, drawn from their 
testimony, what can we make of the statements made by john king when the surrey 
anchored at hobart in 1842 and who, early in 1840, had walked out of the prison 
gate, with his booklet of religious verses, covered in brown paper, smiling perhaps? 

iv. intimate reading: `i am not married but...'
john king was sentenced to seven years transportation in december 1841 for stealing old canvas. his conduct record gives his age as twenty-four but he was only 
twenty.80 in his statement he declared five previous imprisonments: `2 months for 
shoes; 14 days for lathwood; vagrancy 3 months; for soil 14 days; 3 months for stealing'. in the `black books', his life was tabulated so the convict authorities might 
better monitor his conduct, exploit his labour and identify him if he absconded. as 
james bradley and hamish maxwell-stewart caution us, their inspection `served to 
remind convicts of their status as subjected (and subjectified) objects of "panopti con" knowledge, imprisoned by descriptions of their own bodies and regulated by 
the internalisation of this knowledge.'81

yet, in notating the tattooed markings on convict bodies, the penal clerks 
unwittingly recorded many convicts' own embodied statements. in their highly 
original `quantitative deconstruction' and `qualitative exposition' of the indents of 

 79   gaol keeper's journal, 25 and 29 march 1843; william chapman, 20472, per  mount stewart elphinstone (2), 1848, con33/1/89, con14//38.
 80   john king, 6533, per  surrey  (4), 1842, extra identifier 2, [database no. 40331],  con33/1/27, 

con14/1/13. he was baptized 21 may 1822, st nicholas church, yarmouth; england & wales chris tening records.
 81   bradley and maxwell-stewart, `"behold the man": power, observation and the tattooed convict', journal of australian studies, 12.1 (summer 1997), pp. 71-97 (p. 75). 

28
five thousand tattooed convicts, bradley and maxwell-stewart examine the `margin 
between contending constructions of convict subjectivity', between the `state record' 
and tattoo descriptions, which suggest `a "popular" counter-narrative of mediation, 
resistance and transcendence.' 82 their approach offers me a method not only of 
deconstructing the quantitative data on the yarmouth convicts to explore their col lective experience but also of applying these findings in an intimate reading of john 
king's tattoos. he had begun to decorate his `pockpitted stout made' body as early 
as 1840, when the gaoler noted `several pricked letters and marks on both arms'. 83 
professional tattooists and designs did not emerge until the 1860s, so king's tattoos 
will have been made by himself or by companions. 84 tattooing was one of the illicit 
activities that went on in the cells, undetected. the gaoler recorded only three occasions when he discovered inmates pricking themselves in the years 1836-45. yet 
he had need to remind prisoners of the ban on tattooing, noting, when he caught 
eighteen-year-old james thirkettle pricking himself, he `had, as well as the whole of 
the prisoners, been cautioned in that respect.' 85 tattooing was a common pastime 
aboard the convict ships and, by the end of his voyage, john king had adorned his 
breast, arms and outer left leg using red dye as well as the more typical black and 
blue. while john king's body art was probably still work-in-progress, his elaborate 
tattoos spectacularly depicted the man he felt himself to be. 

john king was committed to yarmouth gaol on eight occasions and, when 
quizzed by the principal superintendent of convicts at hobart, did not recall his 

 82   bradley and maxwell-stewart, `"behold the man"', p. 77. see also maxwell-stewart and bradley, `convict 

tattoos: tales of freedom and coercion', in field and millett (eds.),  convict love tokens, pp. 47-52; 
and david kent, `decorative bodies: the significance of convicts' tattoos', journal of australian studies 53 (1997): 78-88. 
 83   the description of his body and tattoos are in the remarks section of the conduct record under the 

data on physical characteristics. for king's early tattoos, see gr, 10 february 1840.
 84   for the practicalities of amateur tattooing, see ira dye, `the tattoos of early american seafarers, 

1796-1818', in  proceedings of the american philosophy society  133.4 (1989): 520-54, especially   
pp. 527-32. thanks to matt lodder for this reference.
 85   gaol keeper's journal, jan 1836-dec 1840 (y/l2 47, norfork pro) and jan 1841-dec 1845 (y/l2 48); 

23 july 1845. see helen rogers, `tattooing in gaol, conviction: stories from a nineteenth century 
prison,' http://convictionblog.com/2013/11/15/tattooing-in-gaol/

 29 
earliest confinements in 1836 when he was fourteen, the first just a day for being 
absent from his service - a minor infraction he may have forgotten or considered 
irrelevant. his second was on suspicion of felony with four other juveniles. all were 
released after two days. 86 each returned to gaol; only one escaped transportation. 
the earliest offence king mentioned in his statement was in 1838, when he was 
apprehended as a vagrant near a timber yard with three planks of lathwood. 87 like 
many of the companions he met inside and outside prison, he supplemented casual 
earnings by scavenging materials; he admitted `removing soil' and `three months 
stealing' (two shovels obtained by false pretences with richard thaxter, also sub sequently transported).88 work, play and offending shaded into each other; half of 
king's offences were committed with others. he was lucky to have avoided transportation when convicted alone in 1838, his first time for felony, for `stealing 16 pairs of 
shoes value of ten shillings and fifteen pairs of shoes value of 5s'.89 in all probability, 
this was the event he wished to remind himself of when he etched the date `april 
1838' on his skin; about 40% of dates in convict tattoos coincide with a conviction.90

like two-thirds of the yarmouth exiles who had lost at least one parent, john 
king's mother had died. he commemorated her name in capitals in his tattoos - 
`sarah king' - along with the initials of the family members he gave the convict 
superintendent. they can be found in the 1841 census, living on the beach and 
employed in manual labour connected with the port. king's father charles was a 
beachman, his elder brother charles a twinespinner and sister sarah a beatster, who 
sewed fishing nets for her living, while carolyn (fourteen) and susannah (ten) had 
yet to start work.91 at yarmouth, as we have seen, boys tended to follow their father's 

 86   gaol committal and discharge book, 10 october 1836 and 20 december 1836.
 87   gr, 9 february 1838.
 88   gr, 5 september 1840; gaol committal and discharge book, 14 may 1838. robert thaxten [thaxter], 

17789, per maitland, 1844, con33/1/76, con17/1/1, p. 236.
 89   gr, 16 april 1838.

 90   gr, 10 february1840. bradley and maxwell stewart, `"behold the man"', p. 85; kent, `decorative 

bodies', p. 64.
 91   1841 census, ho 107/794/1. names and initials were the most common form of convict tattoo; kent, 

`decorative bodies', p. 83.

30
occupation. as a beachman, charles king will have combed the shore for drift, 
helped to bring in stranded boats, and loaded and unloaded their cargo - irregular, 
unskilled work that drew many men into pilfering. he appears to have wanted something else for his sons. young charles was learning a trade - rope making - unlike 
john who, following his absence from service, seems to have lost the apprenticeship 
that, most likely, his father had found him, for he was always listed as a labourer in 
the gaol registers. perhaps john was no longer welcome at home for he was impris oned three times as a vagrant, the last at the start of 1841 when he was found stealing bones.92 

that summer, king was not with his family when the census was taken. almost 
certainly he was the john king, aged 20, living with three elderly persons and a 
young woman mary bowles, also 20, and a baby, john bowls [sic]. 93 in the gaol and 
conduct records king was listed as single but, though he was under no compunction 
so to do, he volunteered to the superintendent of convicts, `i am not married but 
have lived with mary ann balls and had 2 children by her.' in january 1840, when 
king was serving three months for vagrancy and criminal intent, it is possible that 
his sweetheart was imprisoned too. the factory worker maria bowler, aged twentyone and single with one child, was imprisoned for seven days for refractory conduct 
in the workhouse. during her sentence, she was taught by sarah martin who noted 
in her journal, `she had been extremely unkind to her baby of 6 months old.' two 
months later, the teacher visited maria bowler in the workhouse, finding the young 
mother `much softened in temper and manner'; an improvement martin attributed 
to solitary confinement and instruction: `she said she did not like being shut up 
alone and not allowed to speak - if she only sang to her baby. mrs shuckford [the 
gaoler's wife] sends an order that she should be quiet.'94 but maria bowler was sent 
down again the following year for running away from the workhouse with items 
of clothing. john king was again in prison, serving three months for vagrancy. 95 

 92   gr, 15 january 1841.
 93   1841 census, ho 107/793/5. 
 94   gr, 21 january 1840; martin, everyday book, 30 march 1840.
 95   gr, 27 march 1841 for maria bowler; 15 jan 1841 for john king.

 31 
i cannot establish if mary ann balls, mary bowles and maria bowler were the same 
woman, as seems likely, nor what happened to king's lover and their children after 
he was transported. 

`i am not here for any thing that is a disgrace' john king had told his christian 
teacher when imprisoned for vagrancy in 1839. but vagrancy may well have been 
either cause or effect of the apparent rift from his birth family. certainly it will have 
prevented him from caring effectively for his young family and mary ann balls. was 
this in his mind when he admitted to the superintendent of convicts, `vagrancy 
3 months'? mary ann balls appears to figure in john king's tattoos, perhaps with 
her two children if the letter-string `ejmb' refers to their initials. regardless of his 
inability to meet his manly duty as provider for his family, king's tattoos conveyed 
the romantic ideals of constancy, companionship and hope. as so often in popu lar culture, these ideals were symbolized by a female figure. two of king's tattoos 
depicted loving attachment: `man woman in each hand 2 sprigs'; `sailor & woman 
with cross'. representations of the sailor's fond farewell or joyful return to his sweetheart frequently adorned love tokens, illustrated songs and broadsides, and will have 
been especially resonant to men like john king, raised in a seaport, who frequently 
sported them in their tattoos.96 they remind us that popular culture was often more 
sentimental than bawdy in tone and infused with religious sentiment. 97 while convicts commonly identified with the crucified christ in their tattoos, however, we cannot know if john king's sailor and woman shouldered the cross together or if she 
bore it alone, just as mary ann balls was left to raise her children on her own.98 

 96   field and millett (eds.),  convict love tokens. for examples, many containing images similar to those 

in convict tattoos, see the national museum of australia's online exhibition, `convict love tokens', 
collected by timothy millett, http://love-tokens.nma.gov.au/.
 97   vic gammon,  desire, drink and death in english folk and vernacular song, 1600-1900  (aldershot: 

ashgate, 2008).
 98   at least 150 of 5000 male convicts studied by bradley and maxwell-stewart wore a tattooed cross; 

`"behold the man"', p. 95, no. 54. crucifixions were adopted by more catholics than protestants. 
32.3% of kent's sample of male convicts from ireland sported a cross compared with 8.5% of their 
counterparts from england; see `decorative bodies', pp. 81, 86-7. for the sacred and profane in con vict iconography, see also maxwell-stewart and duffield, `skin deep devotions', in caplan (ed.), 
written on the body.

32
though listed as a labourer in the gaol and census records, king gave his occupation as fisherman at hobart. on his left breast, over his heart, was a barque, possibly 
the surrey on which he was transported but more likely the ship he had wished to 
join, for he also depicted a mermaid, two anchors and fish, all familiar talismans of 
mariners. where his father worked on the shoreline, john king looked out to sea. the 
name `robert jacup' was spelled out, almost certainly the 24 year-old yarmouth 
shipwright with whom king surely enthused about boats. 99 `rj.ac.ob' appeared on 
the letter string on king's outside left leg and there was an `r' between his right 
forefinger and thumb. robert jacup was clearly a significant other: mentor, lover, 
partner-in-crime?100 perhaps they swapped tattoos. 

tattooing was an integral part of yarmouth's sea-faring culture, as it was of 
life aboard the convict ships. 28 of the 34 men from yarmouth were tattooed on 
arrival in van diemen's land (82.35%), far more than the 26% of arrivals from 
scotland.101 like other convict body art, john king's tattoos drew on symbols of 
male prowess - `man with bow & arrow lion eagle' - but others were more ominous 
in tone. there appears to have been a `bat & [purse?]' - nocturnal and nefarious 
pursuits? - alongside the note to self - `j.k. prepare to meet thy god'. the words 
echoed the hell-fire-and-brimstone preaching of king's teacher at yarmouth gaol 
but did they signal penitence, fatalism, blasphemy? an intimate reading of his tat toos cannot disclose their full meaning but it can show how john king expressed 
himself through the popular cosmology found in other convict tattoos which mixed 
the sacred and profane, light and dark; `j.k. prepare to meet thy god heart & dart 
flowerpot gk ass manshead'. 

 99   1841 census, ho 107/793/7.
 100   robert jacup does not appear in the gaol registers, \gamma \delta \theta \lambda \xi \delta \pi  \sigma  \upsilon \xi \lambda \phi \psi  \omega fffiflfi\delta \xi \lambda  ffi\phi \theta fi\psi ffl\phi ff\psi , or records of 

transportation.
 101   james bradley and hamish maxwell-stewart, `embodied explorations: investigating convict tattoos 

and the transportation system', in duffield and bradley (eds.),  representing convicts, p. 187. their 
findings are for much the same period (1840-53) as here. see also james bradley, `body commodification? class and tattoos in victorian britain', in written on the body, pp. 136-55.

 33 
v. conclusion
cultural historians have alerted us to the significance of narratives in shaping iden tity but have tended to privilege written texts as the source of such narratives and as 
means to their interpretation. john king's body art suggests an alternative personal 
history to that contained in the terse statements recorded by the convict authority 
and hints at his inner life as well as the man he chose to display to the world. his 
coded words and symbols speak to us suggestively yet elusively. they do not give us 
access to the `real' john king but, when combined with his penal record and other 
data about his life and social relationships, an intimate reading allows us to do a little 
more than speculate on their meaning. 

understanding about past lives can be derived not just from the texts that 
produce individuals as `subjects' but from the gaps, overlaps, and tensions within 
and between those records. in his much-cited preface to  the making of the english 
working class , edward thompson proposed that `if we watch [ . . . ] men over an 
adequate period of social change, we observe patterns in their relationships, their 
ideas, and their institutions.'102 thompson dismissed the use of quantitative analysis 
in reconstituting such relationships and yet it can enable us to observe patterns in 
social connections and in people's behaviour that are not always, nor only, observ able in records of their expression. 

correlating information on individual offending histories in the convict indents 
with yarmouth gaol's admissions registers reveals official documentation substantially 
under-recorded convicts' previous convictions by about by about two-thirds. this has 
important implications for on-going research on persistent offending. together, the 
founders and survivors  and  digital panopticon  projects are reconstructing the lifecourses of convicts sentenced at the old bailey and transported to van diemen's land, 
unprecedented in scale of investigation and forensic detail. but to capture a fuller 
picture of the petty offending histories typical of most convicts, further research will 
be needed linking convict records to sentencing in the lower courts where the vast 

 102   e. p. thompson, the making of the english working class (new york: vintage, 1963), p. 11.

34
majority of cases (around 80% at yarmouth) were heard. tracking convicts' life his tories backwards as well as forwards will enable us to root `criminal' behaviour in the 
cultures and economies of particular localities, neighbourhoods and households. this 
may assist us to be more precise about the pressures on individuals and families that 
led to `delinquency', such as the high levels of orphanage that compounded the pov erty and underemployment experienced by many lads and young men from yarmouth. 

an immersive, intimate practice of reading, of the kind conducted in this article, 
can help us reconstruct from abstracted data on individuals, garnered by officialdom, 
something of the experience and agency of people living in an actual time and place. 
`what good would it do you if you could possibly deceive me?' asked the yarmouth 
prison teacher sarah martin when she accused john king of being a vagrant and 
thief; `even then would not god know what you are? and would you not know your self to be what you are? he looked disconcerted and agreed to this'. we cannot know 
if john king, or indeed martin's other scholars sent to van diemen's land, inter nalized this judgement of self. but grilled by the superintendent of convicts, half 
the yarmouth men were candid about their offending record, stating most, if not 
all, of their convictions, and especially their longer imprisonments. the other half 
were more selective in their account but only five gave no former offences and all 
admitted the crime which had them transported. in the information they supplied 
about their occupations and families, the yarmouth convicts were largely credible 
witnesses to their own life histories. when their statements are read alongside other 
records about their lives, we learn some of what sarah martin could not know but 
also much that she did: that most had lost parents or become disengaged from their 
family; that regular work and family ties were sources of stability and that lack of 
employment and supervision could undermine those ties; and so too could the lure 
of companionship and conviviality rooted in the masculine, rough-and-ready, com ing-a-going street culture of the seaport. in his vibrant tattoos, john king's body bore 
that culture's attractions, its spirit, and its costs:

barque on left breast mermaid man woman in each hand 2 sprigs man with 
bow & arrow lion eagle ejmb sun half moon 3 stars heart & darts & several 